<h2> <a id="I">I</a></h2>
<p>When the clergyman had gone, the
bride turned.</p>
<p>Before her was an open window
before which was the open sea. In
the air was a tropical languor, a savour
of brine, the scent of lilies, the sound
of mandolins that are far away. Below, in the
garden, were masses of scarlet, high heaps of
geranium blooms. A bit beyond was the
Caprian blue of the San Diego Bay. There,
a yacht rode, white and spacious. The yacht
belonged to her husband who was beside her.
She turned again and as passionately he embraced
her; she coloured.</p>
<p>For the moment, as they stood there, they
seemed so sheerly dissimilar that they might
have come of alien races, from different zones.
He, with his fair hair, his fair skin, his resolute
and aggressive face, was typically Anglo-Saxon.
She, with her delicate features, her
dense black hair, and disquieting eyes, looked<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_8">[8]</a></span>
like a Madrilene Madonna—one of those
fascinating and slightly shocking creations of
seventeenth-century art that more nearly resemble
infantas serenaded by caballeros than
queens of the sky. There was a deeper contrast.
He appeared frankly material; she,
all soul.</p>
<p>Leisurely she freed herself.</p>
<p>“One might know,” she began, then paused.
A smile completed the sentence.</p>
<p>He smiled too.</p>
<p>“Yes, Leilah, one might know that however
I hold you to me, I never can hold you
enough.”</p>
<p>“And I! I could be held by you forever.”</p>
<p>On the door came a tap, rapid and assured.
A page entered, the preoccupation of the tip
in his face, in his hand a platter of letters.</p>
<p>The man, taking the letters, dismissed him.</p>
<p>“Miss Ogston,” he continued. “From your
father, confound him. It is the last time he
will address you in that fashion. Miss Ogston,”
he repeated. “From the Silverstairs, I
fancy. Gulian Verplank. There is but one
for me.”</p>
<p>He looked at his watch. “The launch from
the yacht will be here shortly.”</p>
<p>“When do we start?”</p>
<p>“Whenever you like. The Marquesas will<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_9">[9]</a></span>
keep. Bora-Bora will be the same whenever
we get there. Only——”</p>
<p>“Only what?”</p>
<p>“I am in love with you, not with hotels.”</p>
<p>“Let us go then. There will be a moon to-night?”</p>
<p>“A new one, a honeymoon, a honeymoon
begun.”</p>
<p>“Gulian! As if it could end!”</p>
<p>In pronouncing the “u” in his name her
mouth made the sketch of a kiss.</p>
<p>“You would not wish it to?” he asked.</p>
<p>“When I die, perhaps, and even then only
to be continued hereafter. Heaven would not
be heaven without you.”</p>
<p>She spoke slowly, with little pauses, in a
manner that differed from his own mode of
speech, which was quick and forceful.</p>
<p>Verplank turned to the letter that had been
addressed to him, and which he still held.
Without opening it, he tore it into long, thin
strips. It was, he knew from the imprint, a
communication of no importance; but, at the
moment, the action seemed a reply to her remark.
It served to indicate his complete indifference
to everything and everyone save her
only. Afterward, with a regret that was to be
eternal, she wished he had done the same with
hers.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_10">[10]</a></span></p>
<p>Yet, pleased at the time, she smiled.</p>
<p>“Gulian, you do love me, but I wonder do
you love me as absolutely as I love you?”</p>
<p>Verplank, with a gesture that was familiar
to him, closed and opened a hand.</p>
<p>“I do not know. But while I think you cannot
love me more wholly than I love you, I do
know that to me you are the unique.”</p>
<p>Leilah moved to where he stood.</p>
<p>“Gulian, and you to me. You are the only
one.” She moved closer. Raising her hands,
she put them on his shoulders. “Tell me, shall
you be long away?”</p>
<p>“An hour or two. Apropos, would you care
to leave before dinner?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“We will dine on board, then. Is there
anything in particular you would like?”</p>
<p>“Yes, lilies, plenty of lilies; and pineapples;
and the sound of your voice.”</p>
<p>Lifting her hands from his shoulders to his
face, she drew it to her own. Their lips met
longly. With the savour of her about him,
Verplank passed out.</p>
<p>Idly Leilah turned. Before her the sea lay,
a desert of blue. Below, on the beach, it broke
with a boom in high white waves which, in retreating,
became faintly mauve. The spectacle
charmed her. But other scenes effaced it;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_11">[11]</a></span>
sudden pictures of the Marquesas; the long
flight southward; the brief, bright days; the
nights that would be briefer still. Pleasurably
for a while these things detained her. Idly
again she turned.</p>
<p>On the table were the letters. One was
from an intimate friend, Violet Silverstairs, a
New York girl who had married an Englishman,
and who since then had resided abroad.
The other was—or appeared to be—from
Matlack Ogston.</p>
<p>Matlack Ogston was Leilah’s father. That
a father should write to a daughter is only
natural. But that this father should write
surprised her, as already it had surprised Verplank.
When he mentioned whom the letter
was from she had thought he must be in error.
Now, as she opened it, she found that he had
been. Her father had not written. The envelope
contained a second envelope addressed
to another person. This envelope had formerly
been sealed and since been opened. It
held three letters in an unknown hand.</p>
<p>She began at one of them. More exactly,
she began, as some women do begin, at the end.
The signature startled. At once, as she turned
to the initial sentences, she experienced the
curious and unenviable sensation of falling
from an inordinate height, and it was not with<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_12">[12]</a></span>
any idea that the sensation would cease, but
rather with the craving to know, which in
certain crises of the emotions becomes more
unendurable than any uncertainty can be, that
she read the rest of the first letter; after it, the
second letter, and the third.</p>
<p>Then, as truth stared at her and she at truth,
so monstrous was its aspect that, with one shuddering
intake of the breath, life withered within
her, light vanished without.</p>
<p>When ultimately, without knowing who she
was; when, conscious only of an objective self
struggling in darkness with the intangible and
the void, when then life and light returned,
she was on the floor, the monster peering at
her.</p>
<p>She disowned it, disavowed it. But beside
her on the floor the letters lay. There was its
lair. It had sprung from them, and always
from them it would be peering at her, driving
her mad with its blighting eyes, unless——</p>
<p>She got on her hands and knees, and from
them to her feet. Her body ached from the
fall, and her head was throbbing. With the
idea that smelling salts, or some cologne water
which she had, might help her, she went and
fetched them from an adjoining room. They
were not of much use, she found, though presently
she could think more clearly, and in a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_13">[13]</a></span>
little while she was considering the possibility
that had loomed.</p>
<p>In certain conditions the soul gets used to
monsters. It makes itself at home with what
it must. Her soul, she thought, might also.
But even as she thought it, she knew she never
could. She knew that even were she able to
succeed in blinding herself to this thing by
day, at night it would crawl to her, sit at her
side, pluck at her sleeve, wake her, and cry:
“Behold me!”</p>
<p>It would cry it at her until she cried it at
him. Then inevitably it would kill her.</p>
<p>She had been seated, bathing her head with
cologne. Now fear, helplessness, the consciousness
of both possessed her. They impelled
her to act. She stood up. She looked
about the room. Filled with flowers and sunshine,
it said nothing. Beyond was the sea. It
called to her. It told her that in a rowboat
she could drift and be lost. It told her that
that night she could throw herself from the
yacht. The blue expanse, the high white
waves, the little mauve ripples invited.</p>
<p>The room, though, with its flowers and sunshine,
deterred. To throw herself from the
yacht meant that she would have to wait. It
meant more. It meant that she would have to
see him. It meant that she would have to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_14">[14]</a></span>
feign and pretend. These things she could not
do.</p>
<p>There remained the rowboat. Yet, in some
way, now, the sea seemed less inviting. At the
thought of its embrace and of its depths she
shrank. To die, to cease any more to be, to
succumb like the heroines of the old tragedies
to fate, at the idea of that, her young soul revolted.
There must be some other course.</p>
<p>She looked from the window. Beneath, before
the ocean, a motor was passing. The
whirr of it prompting, flight occurred to her,
an escape to some spot that would engulf her
as surely as the waves. Hesitatingly she considered
it. But there was nothing else. Moreover,
if she were to go, she must go at once.</p>
<p>She turned, crossed the room, stooped,
gathered the letters, and seated herself at the
table. There she put the letters in another
envelope which she addressed to Verplank.
While writing his name, her hand trembled,
it shook on the paper drops of ink. These she
tried to blot, and made a smear.</p>
<p>Trembling still, she got up, went to the telephone,
and attempted to speak. At first, too
overcome to do so, she leaned against the wall.
It did not seem possible that she could do this
thing. But she must, she knew. At last, with
an effort, she spoke.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_15">[15]</a></span></p>
<p>“When does the next train leave San Diego?
One moment. Have my servants sent to
me; my servants, yes, and—and order a
motor.”</p>
<p>Again she leaned against the wall. The
room had become intolerable. Into the languors
of the air a suffocation had entered, and
it was unconsciously, in a condition semi-somnambulistic
that she found herself considering
the pink of the ceiling, then the rose-leaves
woven in the green of the carpet, the dull red
of the table-cover, the darker red of a tassel,
the tall vase that stood on the table and in
which were taller lilies.</p>
<p>There, beneath them was the monster. Its
vibrations, disseminating through the room,
were silhouetted on the walls. She could not
see them, but she could feel them. They
choked her.</p>
<p>But now her servants appeared. Nervously,
with an irritability so foreign to her, that they
eyed each other uncertainly, she gave them
hurried commands. These obeyed and the
porters summoned, she passed, choking still,
from this room, the secrets of which the walls
detained.</p>
<p>It was perhaps preordered that they should
do so. Long later, in looking back, she realised
that destiny then was having its say with<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_16">[16]</a></span>
her, and realised also why. At the time, however,
she was ignorant of two incidents, which,
after the fashion of the apparently insignificant,
subsequently became the reverse.</p>
<p>One incident had the porters for agent; the
other was effected by a maid who supervened.
The porters, in removing the luggage, collided
with the table. The inkstand, the tall vase
with the taller lilies, were upset; the vase,
spilling water and flowers, fell broken on the
floor; from the stand, ink rippled on the red of
the cloth, on the darker red of the tassels, on
the envelope which Leilah had directed to
Verplank. These things, a maid, summoned
by the crash, removed.</p>
<p>When Verplank returned, the table was
bare.</p>
<p>He did not notice. What he alone noticed
was Leilah’s absence. She is below, he told
himself. Then precisely as she had summoned
her servants, he summoned his.</p>
<p>“Roberts,” he said presently to a man.
“Find Mrs. Verplank. Then get my things
together. We start at once.”</p>
<p>For a moment the man considered the master.
At once civilly but stolidly he spoke:</p>
<p>“Mrs. Verplank has gone, sir.”</p>
<p>Verplank, who had turned on his heel,
turned back.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_17">[17]</a></span></p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“The hotel is full of it, sir. When I found
that Mrs. Verplank was leaving, I——”</p>
<p>“What!” Verplank, in angry amazement,
repeated.</p>
<p>“Mrs. Verplank is taking the limited, sir.
It was the clerk who told me.”</p>
<p>Then, for a moment, the master considered
the man. At the simple statement his mind
had become like a sea in a storm. A whirlwind
tossed his thoughts.</p>
<p>But Leilah was still too near, her caresses
were too recent for him to be able to realise
that she had actually gone, and the fact that he
could not realise it disclosed itself in those
words which all have uttered, all at least before
whom the inexplicable has sprung:</p>
<p>“It is impossible!”</p>
<p>“Yes, sir, it does seem most unusual.”</p>
<p>Verplank had spoken less to the man than
to himself, and for a moment stood engrossed
in that futilest of human endeavours, the effort
to read a riddle of which the only Œdipus is
time.</p>
<p>At once all the imaginable causes that could
have contributed to it danced before him and
vanished. He told himself that Leilah’s disappearance
might be an attempt at some
hide-and-go-seek which shortly would end.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_18">[18]</a></span>
But he knew her to be incapable of such nonsense.
Immediately he decided that his servant
was in error, and that she was then on the
yacht. If not, then, clearly she had gone mad,
or else——</p>
<p>But there are certain hypotheses which certain
intellects decline to stomach. Yet the letter
from her father recurring to him, he did
consider the possibility that she might have
gone because of some secret of his bachelor
life. Anything may be distorted. Unfolded
by her father, these secrets, which in themselves
were not very dark, might be made to
look infernal, and could readily be so made by
this man who was not only just the one to do it,
but who would have an object in so doing.
Always he had been inimical to Verplank, and
this, the abandoned bridegroom then felt, not
on his account, but because of his father.</p>
<p>The latter, Effingham Verplank, had been a
great catch, and a great beau. His charm had
been myrrh and cassia—and nightshade, as
well—to many women, among others to an
aunt of Leilah, Hilda Hemingway, whose
husband had called him out, called him
abroad, rather, where the too charming Verplank
waited until Hemingway fired, and then
shot in the air. He considered that the gentlemanly
thing to do. He was, perhaps, correct.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_19">[19]</a></span>
But perhaps, too, it was hardly worth
while to go abroad to do it. Yet, however that
may be, the attitude of the injured husband,
while no doubt equally correct, was less debonair.
He obtained a divorce.</p>
<p>The matter created an enormous scandal, in
the sedater days when New York society was
a small and early family party and scandals
were passing rare. But, like everything else,
it was forgotten, even, and perhaps particularly
by the parties directly concerned. Hemingway
married again; the precarious Hilda
married also; the too charming Verplank vacated
the planet, and his widow went a great
deal into the world.</p>
<p>This lady had accepted the scandal, as she
had accepted many another, with a serenity
that was really beautiful. But, then, her seductive
husband had always seemed to her so
perfectly irresistible, so created to conquer,
that—as their son afterward found it necessary
to explain—it no more occurred to her to
sit in judgment on his victims, than it occurred
to her to sit on him. With not only philosophic
wisdom, but in the true spirit of Christian
charity, she overlooked it all.</p>
<p>The culminant episode in the matter—the
death of the volatile Verplank—took place at
an hour when his son was too young to be more<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_20">[20]</a></span>
than aware that his father had been taken away
in a box. Leilah was even less advanced. It
was years before she learned of her aunt’s delinquencies.
When she did, that lady had also
passed away, as had previously passed a child
of hers, one that, perhaps, did not belong to
her first husband, and, certainly not to her second,
the result being that, in default of other
heirs, she left a fortune to Leilah, whose
mother had left her another.</p>
<p>When her mother died, Leilah was in the
nursery. Her father, who thereafter abandoned
her to servants and governesses, she seldom
saw. When she did see him, he ignored
her completely. It was a way he had. He
ignored also and quite as completely the son of
the deadly Verplank.</p>
<p>To make up for it, or it may be to make
trouble, the boy’s mother never regarded Leilah
otherwise than with that smile of sweet
approbation with which she gratified all the
world—all the world, that is, save those only
who were not in hers. Among the gratified
were the Arlington girls, two beauties, of
whom the elder, Violet, was Leilah’s closest
friend.</p>
<p>It was at Newport, at Violet’s wedding to
Silverstairs, a young Englishman who had
followed her from Europe, and who at once<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_21">[21]</a></span>
took her back there; it was at this ceremony, in
which Leilah participated as bridesmaid, and
Verplank as best man, it was then that both
became aware of a joint desire. It seemed to
them that they were born to love each other, to
love always, forever. Forever!—in a world
where all things must end, and do. But the
eagerness of it was upon them. Leilah wrote
to her father. Verplank wrote to him also.</p>
<p>Matlack Ogston ignored Verplank’s letter
as invariably he had ignored Verplank. His
daughter’s he promptly returned. Across it
was scrawled one word. That word was No.</p>
<p>Interests more commonplace had meanwhile
transported Verplank from Newport to
San Francisco. Informed of the veto, which
to Leilah was an incentive and to him an affront,
he had wired her to meet him at Coronado,
this resort in Southern California which
together they had been preparing to leave.</p>
<p>The night previous, on a yacht chartered at
the Golden Gate, Verplank had arrived. It
was by train, the next morning, that Leilah had
come. The wedding followed. Before them
lay a world of delight.</p>
<p>This was hardly an hour since. Now, like
a bubble, abruptly that world had burst.</p>
<p>Yet why?</p>
<p>In that query was the riddle which impotently<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_22">[22]</a></span>
Verplank was trying to solve. With a
clutch at a possible solution, he turned to his
servant:</p>
<p>“Roberts, get a motor. If Mrs. Verplank is
not on the yacht, I will take a special, and
follow her.”</p>
<p>“Yes, sir. Shall you wish me to go with
you?”</p>
<p>“No, stay here until you hear from me. At
any moment Mrs. Verplank may return.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>But Leilah did not return. Nor did the
special, in which Verplank followed, overtake
her. The first intelligence of her that reached
him was the announcement of her engagement
to another man.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_23">[23]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="II">II</a></h2>
<p>In Paris, many moons later, an Englishman,
Howard Tempest, looked in, at the Opéra,
on his cousin, Camille de Joyeuse. This
lady, connected by birth with Britannia’s best,
and, through her husband, with the Bourbons,
delighted the eye, the ear, and the palate. In
appearance, she suggested certain designs of
Boucher; in colouring and in manner, the
Pompadour. Admirable in these respects, she
was admired also, for her gayety, her tireless
smile, and her chef. She had one of the best
cooks in Paris—that is to say, in the world.
Her husband, the Duc de Joyeuse, harmonised
very perfectly with her. He had a head,
empty, but noble, an air vaguely Régence. A
year younger than herself, Time had had the
impertinence to whiten his hair. The duchess
was forty-two. Those unaware of the fact
fancied her twenty-eight. The error greatly
gratified this lady, who, familiarly, was
known as Muffins.</p>
<p>One evening in May, Tempest entered her
box, saluted her, examined the house, and, as,
in a crash of the orchestra, the curtain fell,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_24">[24]</a></span>
seated himself, in response to a gesture, beside
her.</p>
<p>Camille de Joyeuse turned to him, and with
that smile of hers, said: “Do not fail to come
on Sunday, Howard. There is to be a Madame
Barouffska, whom I want you to meet.
She was formerly a Mrs. Verplank. Barouffski
is Number Two.”</p>
<p>“Verplank! Barouffski! What barbarous
names!” Tempest exclaimed. He had vivid
red hair, violent blue eyes, and a great scarlet
cicatrix that tore one side of his face. In spite
of the severity of his evening clothes, he looked
rather barbarous himself. “What was she, a
widow?”</p>
<p>“Yes, but with no tombstone to show. It
appears that she was in love with Verplank for
years, married him one minute and left him
the next.”</p>
<p>Tempest stifled a yawn. “How extremely
fastidious!”</p>
<p>“She ran away, got a divorce, met Barouffski
and married him.”</p>
<p>“Very honourable of her, certainly. From
what pond did you fish her?”</p>
<p>“The Silverstairs’. Violet Silverstairs is an
American you know——”</p>
<p>“Know! I should say I did know. Though,
if I did not, I would take my oath to it. It’s<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_25">[25]</a></span>
got so a fellow can’t stir without running into
one of them. How does Louis like her?”</p>
<p>Louis was the duke.</p>
<p>The duchess displayed her beautiful false
teeth. “Oddly enough, when he was in the
States, he went hunting with her Number
One.”</p>
<p>“In the Rockies?” Tempest, with sudden interest,
inquired. “In the Dakotas?”</p>
<p>“I fancy so. It was a place called, let me
see; yes, Long Island, I think. I remember,
he said it was very jolly.”</p>
<p>Tempest tossed his red head. “Her Number
Two, I suppose, is that chap I have seen at
the Little Club. The Lord knows how he got
there. He looks like a thimblerigger.”</p>
<p>The duchess raised her opera-glass. “Possibly.
Nowadays, so many men do, don’t you
think? There is Marie de Fresnoy with the
Helley-Quetgens! You will have her next to
you on Sunday, Howard. Do not lacerate her
tender heart.”</p>
<p>At the suggestion, Tempest made a face.
His expression amused Camille de Joyeuse.
Indulgently she added: “To make up for it
you shall take Madame Barouffska out.”</p>
<p>But now the curtain was rising. The clear
brilliance of the house faded into a golden
gloom.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_26">[26]</a></span></p>
<p>On the Sunday following, when Tempest
reached the Cours la Reine, in which his
cousin resided, there was a motor before the
perron, and from it a woman was alighting.
As rhythmically, with a grace that is rare in
women who are not ballerines, she mounted
the stair, Tempest had a vision of a figure, tall
and slight, of a mass of black hair, and of a
neck emerging from ermine. In the anteroom
above, while a servant took from her her
cloak and another received Tempest’s hat and
coat, he saw that she was extremely beautiful.</p>
<p>Immediately a footman, throwing open a
door, announced: “Madame la comtesse Barouffska!”
He added at once: “Lord Howard
Tempest!”</p>
<p>In this marriage of their names they entered
a drawing room in which were the Joyeuses,
the Fresnoys, the Silverstairs; others, also,
who momentarily were indistinguishable. The
room—large, wide, high-ceiled—was decorated
gravely, with infinite taste. Beyond it, a
suite of salons extended.</p>
<p>Camille de Joyeuse, advancing to meet her
guests, presented Tempest to Mme. Barouffska.</p>
<p>In a voice which, if a trifle high, was fluted,
the duchess added:</p>
<p>“My dear, this cousin of mine has a terrible<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_27">[27]</a></span>
reputation, and that, I am sure, will commend
him to you.”</p>
<p>With the semblance of a smile, Mme. Barouffska
replied:</p>
<p>“You know I am never quite able to decide
just what construction to put on your remarks.”</p>
<p>“Put the worst, put the worst!” answered the
duchess, whose costume left her splendidly
nude. From a billowy corsage her shoulders
and bust emerged as though rising through
foam, while the light gold tissue of her gown
accentuated the royal outlines of her figure.</p>
<p>Leilah Barouffska, slenderer, taller, wholly
in white, contrasted ethereally with her.
Turning to Tempest she said:</p>
<p>“Lord Howard, I have heard so much that
is interesting about you.”</p>
<p>“Not from Muffins, then.”</p>
<p>“Yes, but also from Silverstairs. He told
me that you are the best gentleman jockey in
England and a Sanskrit scholar besides.”</p>
<p>“Oh, I can straddle a horse, if it comes to
that, but otherwise he exaggerates. He has
caught that from his wife—unless it happens
to be from her sister.”</p>
<p>At mention of the girl, Leilah, who had
been looking across the room, turned to Tempest
again. In looking she saw this young<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_28">[28]</a></span>
woman whose allurements—and possibilities—were
generally regarded as excessive. Recently
she had become engaged—perhaps for the
tenth time. Coincidentally was the announcement
that she was going in for light opera.
Now, in reference to her, Leilah said:</p>
<p>“You have met Aurelia, then?”</p>
<p>“I found it very difficult not to.”</p>
<p>“And this young Lord Buttercups to whom
she is engaged, is he nice?”</p>
<p>Tempest adjusted his monocle. “Very. A
trifle wrong in the upper story. So was his
father. So was his grandfather. A fine old
English family.”</p>
<p>Faintly, as before, Leilah smiled. “I
understand that Aurelia is studying for the
stage. Such a queer idea, don’t you think—for
an American heiress, I mean.”</p>
<p>Tempest, extracting his eyeglass, nodded.
“Nowadays, unless an idea is queer, it can
hardly be called an idea at all. But I am glad
this young person is studying something. When
she went to school she must have been taught
everything which it is easiest to forget.”</p>
<p>A servant announced:</p>
<p>“His Excellency, Mustim Pasha!”</p>
<p>The man who entered was short and stout.
He had a full black beard, and the appearance,
slightly Hebraic, which Turks possess.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_29">[29]</a></span>
After M. de Joyeuse had greeted him, he saluted
the duchess.</p>
<p>Beyond, on a sofa, Violet Silverstairs sat
talking to the Baronne de Fresnoy, a young
woman who looked very much as might a
statuette of Tanagra, to which Grévin had
given two big blue circles for eyes, and a small
pink one for mouth, but a statuette articulated,
perhaps, by Eros, and costumed, certainly, by
the Rue de la Paix—though a shade less artistically
than Lady Silverstairs, who always
seemed to have just issued from some paradise
inhabited solely by poet-modistes, and who, in
addition, possessed what Mme. de Fresnoy
lacked, a face delicately and rarely patrician.</p>
<p>Adjacently was her sister, Aurelia, a girl
with a face like an opening rose, and a frock
of such astonishing simplicity that it looked
both virginal and ruinous. This young person
had the loveliest eyes imaginable. In them
and about an uncommonly bewitching mouth
was an expression quite ideally ingénue which,
when least expected, it amused her to transform
into one of extreme effrontery.</p>
<p>On one side of her was Lord Buttercups, an
English youth, small, snubnosed, stupid. On
the other lounged a Roman, Prince Farnese, a
remarkably fine-looking pauper.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_30">[30]</a></span></p>
<p>Turning from the girl’s sister to the Turk,
the young baroness called:</p>
<p>“Here, Musty, come and make love to us.”</p>
<p>The Asiatic was about to abandon Mme. de
Joyeuse, when doors at the farther end of the
room were thrown open, and the duchess put
a hand on his arm.</p>
<p>At table, Tempest, who had taken Leilah
Barouffska out, found his seat indicated beside
her. At his left was Mme. de Fresnoy, whom
he detested. He turned to the American. At
the moment some preoccupation, a nostalgia or
a regret, contracted the angle of her mouth.
The contraction gave her the expression which
those display who have deeply suffered either
from some long malady or from some perilous
constraint.</p>
<p>Mechanically, Tempest considered a dish
which a footman, his hands gloved in silk,
was presenting. When he again turned to the
American, it was as though a curtain had fallen
or risen. Her face had lighted, and it was
with an entirely worldly air that she put before
him this unworldly question:</p>
<p>“Do you believe in fate?”</p>
<p>Tempest laughed. “Not on an empty
stomach. I believe then in nothing but virtue.”</p>
<p>Leilah put down her spoon. “It seems to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_31">[31]</a></span>
me that our lives are sketched in advance. It
may be that we have the power to amplify incidents
or to curtail them, but the events themselves
remain unchanged. They are there in
our paths awaiting us. Though why they are
there——”</p>
<p>As was usual with her, she spoke with little
pauses, in a voice that caressed the ear. Now
she stopped and raised the spoon, in which was
almond soup.</p>
<p>Tempest took a sip of Madeira. “A pal of
mine, a chap I never met for a number of
reasons, though particularly, I suppose, because
he died two thousand years ago, well, he
told me that we should wish things to be as
they are. I have no quarrel with fate. But
if you have, or do have——”</p>
<p>A maître d’hôtel, after presenting a carp
that had been arranged as though swimming
in saffron, was supervising its service.</p>
<p>“Padapoulos,” exclaimed the young Baronne
de Fresnoy, whom the sight of the fish
had, perhaps, excited, “Padapoulos told me
that he dined best on an orchid soup, a mousse
of aubergine, and the maxims of Confucius.”</p>
<p>“Padapoulos,” the legate of the Sublime
Porte gravely commented, “is a poet, and a
Greek. Add those two things together, and
you get—you get——”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_32">[32]</a></span></p>
<p>“Nothing to eat!” the young baroness, with
an explosion of little laughs, threw at him.
“Musty!” she cried. “Whom were you with at
the Variétés last night? I saw you. Yes, I
did. Oh, Musty, who would have thought
that you would be unfaithful to me!”</p>
<p>“These Roumis!” the Turk mentally exclaimed.
“If a wife of mine talked in that
way I would have her impaled.”</p>
<p>Beyond, across an opulent bosom, de Joyeuse
and Silverstairs were talking sport. They
delighted in things that men have always
loved, the pursuit of prey, the joy of killing,
the murderous serenity of the woods.</p>
<p>Farther up was Aurelia. As before, she had
Buttercups on one side, Farnese on the other.
She poked at the former.</p>
<p>“That horrid de Fresnoy woman is trying to
flirt with you, Parsnips. Now, don’t deny it.
I don’t blame her. You are too good-looking.
When we are married—if we ever are—I’ll
make you wear a veil. You sha’n’t go out
except in a closed carriage. Yes, and with
some big, fat, strapping woman to look after
you.”</p>
<p>Beatifically the youth considered her.
“Couldn’t you do that?”</p>
<p>Delicately Aurelia raised a fork. “I shall
have my own affairs to attend to.” For a second<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_33">[33]</a></span>
she nibbled. “I have a few on my hands
as it is.”</p>
<p>Buttercups stabbed at his plate. “I, too,
may have business of my own.”</p>
<p>“Business! Business!” The girl repeated.
“You are so commercial just like all the nobility.
If you were not a peer you would be
mistaken for one. It’s quite painful.”</p>
<p>“That may b-be,” Buttercups spluttered.
“But this idea of yours of going on the stage is
quite as p-painful to me.”</p>
<p>He hesitated, then, as though uttering a
great moral truth, threw out:</p>
<p>“It’s so dreadful to have your name in the
papers!”</p>
<p>“And still more dreadful not to!” the girl
threw back. She turned to Farnese. “You
do nothing but eat!”</p>
<p>With large, melancholy, inconstant eyes the
Italian looked at her. “It is my one consolation
since you became engaged to that imbecile.”</p>
<p>Aurelia pecked at her food. “One always
feels quite safe with an imbecile, and that is so
restful. Try it and see.”</p>
<p>“I’d like to try it with you.”</p>
<p>Aurelia put down her fork. “Am I your
idea of an imbecile? You are flattering, if
insincere.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_34">[34]</a></span></p>
<p>Again the Roman covered her with his
eyes. “It is rather difficult to be the one and
not the other. But I am perfectly sincere
in saying that you are my idea of perfection.”</p>
<p>“Thanks, but, then, you are not mine.”</p>
<p>“And might one ask what yours is?”</p>
<p>Dreamily, with an air of innocence that was
infinite, Aurelia looked at him. “You will
think it childish of me, perhaps, but, like all
young girls—like all young and inexperienced
girls—I have an ideal. A mere maiden’s fancy,
no doubt, and yet one which I cherish so. It
is a vision which at times I have of a blind
man, a deaf mute, a divine creature, invalid
and octogenarian, who would not know what I
did and would not care.”</p>
<p>Pausing, she dropped her eyes and sadly
shook her head. “You will tell me that he
don’t exist.”</p>
<p>“He might be manufactured,” Farnese
cheerfully replied.</p>
<p>Then he, too, paused, drank of the wine before
him, and, perhaps stimulated by it, whispered:</p>
<p>“Believe me, I feel as though I could cut
my throat for you.”</p>
<p>Maliciously Aurelia looked up. “When a
man does not feel that way he has no feeling at<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_35">[35]</a></span>
all. One might even say that he is quite heartless.”</p>
<p>Across the table, Tempest, turning again to
Leilah, said: “Monsieur Barouffski is not
here to-night.”</p>
<p>At the remark, instantly in her face its former
expression of constraint appeared.</p>
<p>“No, he is to join us later.”</p>
<p>At the other end, where the duchess sat,
everybody was laughing. The lady had been
giving an account of a recent bankruptcy, that
of Lord Auld Reekie.</p>
<p>“Heavens!” Violet Silverstairs exclaimed.
“What will become of Bobbles!”</p>
<p>Bobbles was Lady Auld Reekie, a fair
young craft of light timber and many sails.</p>
<p>Camille de Joyeuse, summoning her diligent
smile, replied: “She will go into the
hands of a receiver.”</p>
<p>Another jest followed, and presently, in
the contagion of it almost the entire table
joined.</p>
<p>The delicately toxic fare, the slightly emotionalising
wines, loosened tongues, robbing
them of discretion, and, before the servants, as
though the latter were deaf and dumb, hosts
and guests revealed their naked minds.</p>
<p>“It is rotten to talk in that way before these
men,” Tempest exclaimed. “They get their<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_36">[36]</a></span>
wages with lessons in anarchy thrown in. It’s
too much.”</p>
<p>“I had not heard,” Leilah replied. “I was
thinking of that friend of yours whom you
never met.”</p>
<p>Tempest laughed. “The one who said we
should wish things to be as they are? Ah,
well! I am afraid I am not up to that yet.”</p>
<p>“Nor I. But who was he, if one may ask?
Not Aristotle?”</p>
<p>“No, but, by the way, do you know whom
Aristotle is supposed to be, or rather to have
become? Herbert Spencer! An occultist
told me. He told me also such a curious story.
You have heard, have you not, of Apollonius
of Tyana? Then you may remember it is said
of him that he healed the sick, raised the dead,
knew all things save the caresses of women,
and spoke every language including that of
colours. Well, the occultist told me that Jesus
was a rabbi who surrendered his entity to the
Christ, and afterward reappeared here as
Apollonius. He said, too, that he was not
crucified. Crucifixion, you know, is merely
the symbol of initiation.”</p>
<p>“And whom did he say was the Christ?”</p>
<p>“An envoy from a higher sphere.”</p>
<p>Leilah inclined her head. “Yes, and there<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_37">[37]</a></span>
have, I believe, been others. From zeniths or
from nadirs unknown to us, from planes, let us
say, where all beatitudes are as usual as all
shames are common here, spirits commissioned
to regenerate the hearts of man pass into the
slums of space. Confident, with a crown of
light they come, only to return with one of
thorns.”</p>
<p>Tempest turned squarely in his chair. “That
is a singularly beautiful idea!”</p>
<p>Again Leilah inclined her head. “It is
beautiful. It is beautiful to think that earthward
from some chromatic star the soul of
Krishna may have sunk. But the idea is not
mine. I found it in the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>.”</p>
<p>This last statement was lost. Mme. de
Fresnoy was insisting on Tempest’s attention.
Meanwhile a cygnet, its plumage replaced, a
pond lily in its ochre beak, had been presented,
carved and served. A salad, known as Half-Mourning,
a composition of artichoke hearts
and Piedmontese truffles, had departed with it.
Now sweets had come, pastry light as a caress,
volatile as an essence, that pastry of which the
art is known only to the Oriental and the occasional
cordon bleu.</p>
<p>Devoutly, with an air of invoking the
Prophet, the Turk was absorbing it.</p>
<p>The young Baronne de Fresnoy, abandoning<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_38">[38]</a></span>
Tempest, looked at him. With a wicked
glitter in her big blue eyes she called:</p>
<p>“Musty! Are you thinking of me?”</p>
<p>The pasha was framing a reply, a reply perhaps
rather bald, when Camille de Joyeuse
also addressed him. Presently she stood up.
The others imitated her. The gayeties of the
table were abandoned for the brilliance of the
salons beyond.</p>
<p>Tempest, who had accompanied Leilah Barouffska
said, as she seated herself:</p>
<p>“Are you to remain in Paris?”</p>
<p>Before answering, she looked up at him, for
he was standing. “Who can tell what one will
do? But I fancy so. We have taken a house
in the rue de la Pompe.”</p>
<p>“In the rue de la Pompe!” Tempest exclaimed.
“That is where I live.” He smiled.
The fact that they were neighbours seemed to
constitute a bond. “Whereabouts in the rue
de la Pompe?”</p>
<p>“Next to the church.”</p>
<p>“Do you find it convenient?”</p>
<p>A servant announced:</p>
<p>“Monsieur and madame Spencer-Poole!”</p>
<p>“You mean,” Leilah replied, “am I a Catholic?
No, I am an Episcopalian. But my
views, I fear, are not orthodox. I have got
so far that I believe fully in the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_39">[39]</a></span></p>
<p>She had cited the book at the dinner table
but, at the time, distracted by Marie de Fresnoy,
Tempest had not heard; now he exclaimed
at it.</p>
<p>“The <cite>Vidyâ</cite>! Of all things! Why not the
Upanishads?”</p>
<p>A servant announced:</p>
<p>“Madame la marquise de Charleroi!”</p>
<p>Leilah made a little gesture. “The Upanishads,
too. I have great faith in them also.
Their conceptions seem to me the most perfect
that the human mind has evolved, that is,
if it were a human mind that evolved
them.”</p>
<p>A servant announced:</p>
<p>“Madame la princesse Orlonna!”</p>
<p>“What particularly impressed you in
them?” Tempest asked.</p>
<p>“The demonstration that life is a laboratory
in which the strength of the soul is tried.”</p>
<p>“And in the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>?”</p>
<p>“The fact that selfishness is the root of evil.
That impressed me very much, primarily I
suppose because it is true, but chiefly I think
because I had not realized it before.”</p>
<p>Tempest nodded. Never had he heard a
mondaine cite the Upanishads. In no drawing
room had he ever heard the <cite>Vidyâ</cite> mentioned.
In his life he had not dreamed of having a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_40">[40]</a></span>
digest of each produced in an atmosphere dripping
with frivolities. As he nodded he reconsidered
this woman. From the first he had
realized that she differed from the ordinary
society type. Now he saw that she belonged to
a superior world.</p>
<p>“Do you not admire them, too?” Leilah,
who had also been considering him, inquired.</p>
<p>Tempest adjusted his monocle. “You see,
you know, the Self, the All-Self, the One, the
oneness of self with everything, the oneness
of all things with One, these minor motifs of
theirs I may admire but I do not grasp. On
the contrary, there is a certain voluminous
complexity about them that makes me gasp.
None the less they advance certain ideas which,
while curious to the few and to the many absurd,
are yet so mathematically evident; the
fact for instance——”</p>
<p>A servant announced:</p>
<p>“His Highness monseigneur le prince Paul
de Montebianco!”</p>
<p>“Monsieur Harris!”</p>
<p>The salons were becoming filled. The floor
was swept by trains brief but brilliant. There
was a multiplication of black coats, a renewed
animation, a mounting murmur in which occasionally
the name of a new arrival was lost.</p>
<p>The servant announced:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_41">[41]</a></span></p>
<p>“Monsieur le vicomte and madame la vicomtesse
de Helley-Quetgen!”</p>
<p>“Madame la princesse Zubaroff!”</p>
<p>“Monsieur d’Arcy!”</p>
<p>“Monsieur le comte Barouffski!”</p>
<p>The last of these, a large man, very fair,
with grey-green eyes, had a studied manner
which, however, his voice relieved. As he
advanced and addressed Mme. de Joyeuse, it
sounded supple and silken, as indeed most
Slav voices do.</p>
<p>Already groups had formed. The corner
in which Tempest stood before Leilah developed
another. The Spencer-Pooles approached.
With them was d’Arcy, a young
man abominably good looking, famous for the
prodigious variety of his affairs.</p>
<p>Tempest who had continued talking, who
had even been expounding and who now felt
that he had been holding forth, moved on.
He wanted to smoke and being an habitué of
the household, he knew where the smoking
room was.</p>
<p>There, before an open fire, his hands behind
his back, in that after-dinner attitude which
some men assume, M. de Joyeuse stood. He
was telling of a stag hunt that had been held
at Monplaisir, his estate.</p>
<p>The duke was not an impressionist, his description<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_42">[42]</a></span>
lacked colour. But de Fresnoy, who
had been present, resaw it all; the sheen of the
horses, the green of the whippers-in, the pink
coats of the sportsmen, the blue dolmans of
the officers that had ridden over from a garrison
near by, the verdure of the forest’s edge,
the view, the scramble, the run, the quarry, the
hallali of the huntsman, the leaping hounds,
the fastidious ceremonial of the death and the
sky of pale silk which draped with faint gold
the magnificent brutality of the scene.</p>
<p>“It was just my luck to have missed it,”
Silverstairs threw in.</p>
<p>De Joyeuse turned to him. “We count on
you next autumn. And on you also, mon
vieux,” he added to Tempest who had approached.</p>
<p>Tempest nodded. He was lighting a cigar.
The operation concluded, he drew a chair beside
Silverstairs. “Now, tell me all about
Madame B.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs eyed him quizzingly. “She interests
you?”</p>
<p>“Enormously.”</p>
<p>“Then look out for Barouffski whom she
interests still more.”</p>
<p>Tempest shrugged his shoulders. “Was it
her interest in Number One or Number One’s
interest in her that declined?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_43">[43]</a></span></p>
<p>“You mean Verplank?”</p>
<p>“I suppose I do. Anyway I mean her first
husband. Why were they divorced?”</p>
<p>“Why? But my dear Tempest, divorce in
the States is what racing is with us, a national
amusement. Everybody takes a hand in it.”</p>
<p>“The right or the left?”</p>
<p>“Both I fancy. Though in the case of
Madame B. I have an idea that the right
turned out to be wrong.”</p>
<p>Tempest flicked the ashes from his cigar. “I
may compliment you, Silverstairs. You have
a manner of expressing yourself which is highly
cryptic. But now, to an every day sort of
chap like myself, would you mind being less
abstruse?”</p>
<p>“I should feel sordid if I refused. Verplank
is a very good sort, whereas this Barouffski
is a rotter.”</p>
<p>Tempest bowed. “Thank you for descending
to my level. The long and short of it is
that she has made a mess of it. Well, most
people do. I don’t wonder now that over the
soup she talked about fate.”</p>
<p>“Oh, as for that, after certain experiences of
my own, with which, pray do not be alarmed,
I have no intention of boring you, I have
stopped wondering at anything at all.”</p>
<p>“Silverstairs, in ceasing to be cryptic, do<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_44">[44]</a></span>
not become Spartan. My cousin told me that
Joyeuse hunted with this, with What’s-his-name,
with—er——”</p>
<p>“With Verplank?”</p>
<p>“Yes, that he had hunted with him in the
States. And that reminds me. What have
you decided about that horse?”</p>
<p>Silverstairs pulled at his straw-coloured
moustache. “I’ll let you know to-morrow.
When are you to be at home?”</p>
<p>“Any time after two.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs nodded. “Very good, I will drop
in on you.”</p>
<p>From beyond, blue and vibrant, came the
upper notes of a violin. In the now crowded
salons a Roumanian, the rage of the season,
a youth, very pale, with melancholy eyes,
flowing hair and the waist of a girl, was executing
a fantasy of his own.</p>
<p>De Joyeuse flicked a speck from his sleeve,
threw back his noble and empty head, gave a
circular look of inquiry, a little gesture of invitation,
and accompanied by his friends,
sauntered to the rooms without.</p>
<p>There, Barouffski after saluting Mme. de
Joyeuse had engaged her briefly in talk. But
her attention had been attracted rather than
claimed by the Montebiancan prince, a young
man extremely gentlemanly and equally<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_45">[45]</a></span>
modest who, with that diffidence which royals
and poets share, stood bashfully at her side.</p>
<p>Barouffski, bowing again, passed on. During
his short and entirely fragmentary conversation
with Mme. de Joyeuse, his eyes had
rummaged the room.</p>
<p>Leilah, meanwhile, rising from the sofa
where she had been seated, moved with the
inflammatory d’Arcy into the salon beyond.</p>
<p>Barouffski would have followed. But the
young Baronne de Fresnoy addressed him.
Perversely, with sudden glimpses of little
teeth and an expression of glee in her piquant
face, she asked:</p>
<p>“Was it you who performed that high act
of gallantry at Longchamps to-day?”</p>
<p>“Was it I who did what?” Barouffski surprisedly
exclaimed.</p>
<p>“What was it?” asked Aurelia, who with
Buttercups in tow, had approached.</p>
<p>But Mme. de Fresnoy waved at her. “Go
away my dear, it is not for an ingénue.”</p>
<p>“Ah then, but you see,” Aurelia indolently
interjected, “I am tired of being an ingénue.
An ingénue is supposed to be in a state of constant
surprise and that is so exhausting.”</p>
<p>None the less, with Buttercups still in tow
she betook herself to a corner where she was
promptly joined by Farnese.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_46">[46]</a></span></p>
<p>Then at once to Barouffski, to Mustim
Pasha, to the Helley-Quetgens, to others that
stood about, the young baroness related a
morsel of gossip, the report of which had been
brought her but a moment before, a story that
had one of the reigning demireps for heroine
and for hero a man unidentified by the baronne’s
informant, the tale of an assault committed
before all Paris, before all Paris that
is, that happened to be at the races that day;
an extravaganza in which the heroine, erupting
suddenly on the pelouse before the Grand
Stand, had, with her parasol, struck the hero
over the head and had been about to strike
him again, when he, pinioning her arms with
his own, had to the applause of everybody, prevented
the second assault by kissing her
through her veil; after which releasing the
lady, he had raised his hat and strolled away.</p>
<p>“Was it you, Barouffski?” Mme. de Fresnoy,
the narrative at an end, inquired. “Was
it?”</p>
<p>“I? Nonsense! Why should you ask?”</p>
<p>“It would be just like you, you know. Besides,
I hear that the man was tall and good-looking.”</p>
<p>“You are exceedingly complimentary. But
the world is peopled with tall, good-looking
men.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_47">[47]</a></span></p>
<p>“<i lang="fr">Pas tant que ça</i>,” laughed the baroness.
“Well, if it was not you, perhaps it was that
man who is just coming in.”</p>
<p>Involuntarily Barouffski turned, while a
footman bawled:</p>
<p>“Monsieur Verplank!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_48">[48]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_49">[49]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="III">III</a></h2>
<p>It was in circumstances which, if not dramatic,
were, at least, uncommon, that Leilah
Verplank met Barouffski.</p>
<p>At Los Angeles, after her flight from
Coronado, she caught an express that would
have taken her East. Even so, it could not
take her from herself, it could not distance
memory, it could not annihilate the past. The
consciousness of that obsessed her. Each of
her thoughts became a separate throb. About
her head formed an iron band. Her body
ached. She felt hot and ill. She had a sense
of thirst, a sense, too, of fear.</p>
<p>In the compartment where she sat, a
stranger came. She hid her face, covering it
with her hands. The stranger sidled in between
them, looked her in the eyes, penetrated
them, permeated her, shook long shudders
through her, shrieked at her: “I am Fright!”</p>
<p>She cried aloud. No one heard. She got to
the door.</p>
<p>In the section immediately adjoining were
her women. Perplexed at the start by her unaccountable
flight and, since then, alarmed by<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_50">[50]</a></span>
the abnormal excitability which she had displayed,
both, at the sight of her then, rushed to
her.</p>
<p>Salt Lake was the first possible asylum.
There, weeks later, Leilah arose from one of
those attacks, which, for lack of a better term,
has been called brain fever.</p>
<p>Like fire, fever may consume, it does not
necessarily obliterate. The past remained.
But in that lassitude which fever leaves,
Leilah was able to consider it with a wearied
certainty that no immediate effort could be
required of her then.</p>
<p>“Forget,” some considerate and subliminal
self admonished. “Forget.”</p>
<p>Even in sleep she could not always do that.
But though she could not forget the past, she
could, she believed, barricade herself against
it. The idea was suggested by the local sheet
in which she found an item about neighbourly
Nevada. The item hung a hammock for her
thoughts, rested her mentally, unrolled a
carpet for the returning steps of health.</p>
<p>Verplank, meanwhile, misdirected at Los
Angeles, reached San Francisco. Learning
there that a party of three women had, that
morning, at the last moment, embarked on
the Samoa packet; learning also that of these
women the central figure projected, or seemed<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_51">[51]</a></span>
to project, Leilah’s silhouette, he wired for
his yacht and sailed away in pursuit. But an
accident supervening, the packet reached
Samoa before him. When Verplank got there
the boat was gone. Still in pursuit he started
for the austral seas. There, the mistake discovered,
hope for the time abandoned him and
he landed in Melbourne, ignorant that the
supremely surgical court of Nevada was amputating
him from his wife.</p>
<p>In matters of this solemnity, the Nevada
statutes require that one of the parties to the
operation shall have resided for six months
within the state. But at Carson, the capital, a
town that has contrived to superpose the Puritan
aspect of a New England village on the
vices of a Malay port, in this city Leilah
learned that statutes so severe were not enacted
for such as she.</p>
<p>The information, tolerably consoling, was
placed before her by a young Jew who, as she
alighted from the train, divined her errand,
addressed her with easy Western informality,
put a card in her hand, offered his services,
telling her as he did so that if she retained him
he would have her free in no time, in three
months, in less. It was a mere matter of
money, he explained, and, what he did not explain,
a mere matter of perjury as well, the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_52">[52]</a></span>
perjury of local oafs ready to swear to whatever
they were paid for, ready to testify for
instance that they had known anybody for any
required length of time. But the Jew in divining
Leilah’s errand divined too her loyalty.
In speaking of fees, he kept manœuvres and
methods to himself.</p>
<p>Leilah, repelled yet beguiled, succumbed.
The Jew was retained and in a wretched inn
her things were unpacked. At once a rain
of days began, long, loveless days in which
she tried to starve her thoughts into submission
and bear the cross that had been brought.</p>
<p>The effort was not very satisfactory. The
reason why she should have a cross and why
it should be borne had never even to her devout
mind been adequately explained. Hitherto
she had not required any explanation and
not unnaturally perhaps since she had had no
cross to bear. The dogma that she in common
with the rest of humanity must suffer because
of the natural propensities of beings that never
were, she had accepted as only such dogmas
can be accepted, on faith. But in the dismal
solitudes of Carson, faith faded, the dogma
seemed absurd.</p>
<p>Then suddenly that which in her ignorance
she took to be chance, supplied a superior view.
While waiting in a shop for a slovenly clerk to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_53">[53]</a></span>
do up a package, she looked at a shelf on
which were some books—frayed, bedrabbled,
second hand. Among them was a treatise on
metallurgy, another on horse-breeding, a
string of paper covered novels and the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>.</p>
<p>The title, which conveyed nothing, for that
reason attracted. At random she opened the
book. A paragraph sprang at her:</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p>“From debility to strength, from strength to
power, from power to glory, from glory to perfection,
from plane to plane, in an evolution proceeding
from the outward to the inward, from the material
to the spiritual, from the spiritual to the divine,
such is the destiny of the soul.”</p></div>
<p>Leilah turned a page. Another paragraph
leaped out.</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p>“There is not an accident in our lives, not a
sorrow, a misfortune, a catastrophe, a happiness that
is not due to our own conduct in this existence
or in a previous one. In accordance with the
nature of our deeds there are thrown about us the
tentacles of pain or the arms of joy.”</p></div>
<p>But the slovenly clerk was approaching.
Leilah closed the book, asked the price, paid
for it, paid for the other purchase and went
back to the inn where during the rest of the day
she read the drama of the soul, the story of its
emanation from the ineffable, of its surrender<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_54">[54]</a></span>
to desire, of its fall into matter, of its birth and
rebirth in the mansions of life which are death,
of the persistence there of its illusory joys, of
the recurrences of its unenlightening trials,
until, at last, some memory returning of what
it had been when it was other than what it had
become, it learns at last to conquer desire and
accomplish its own release.</p>
<p>The drama, however old, was new to Leilah,
and at first not very clear. But beneath
it was a chain of causality, the demonstration
that this life is the sum of many others, the
harvest after the sowing, and, joined to the
demonstration were corollaries and deductions
which showed that sorrow, when rightly
viewed, is not a cross but a gift, a boon granted
to the privileged.</p>
<p>It was a little before she mastered the idea.
When she had, the novelty of it impressed. At
the back of the <cite>Vidyâ</cite> was a list of cognate
works. She wired to San Francisco for them.
Shortly they came, and in their companionship
the rain of long, loveless days fell by.</p>
<p>Ultimately she sat on a high chair. An oaf
asked her questions. Others testified. On the
morrow a paper was brought her. It had on it
a large seal, the picture of a big building,
words that were engrossed, others in script.</p>
<p>She was free.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_55">[55]</a></span></p>
<p>The knowledge brought no exultation. It
was a hostage to joy, one of the many that she
was to give.</p>
<p>Meanwhile she had written to Violet Silverstairs
telling her that she had separated
from Verplank, and asking might she join her.
The answer, which was cabled, told her to
come. That day she started.</p>
<p>The town house of the Earls of Silverstairs
is in Belgrave Square. There are worse places.
But to the American countess the discomforts
of the residence were not to be endured. After
one season she declined to put up with them.
Pending an entire modernisation of the house,
she and Silverstairs migrated to Paris, where
they took an apartment, and a very charming
one, in the rue François Premier.</p>
<p>In this apartment Leilah was made to feel
that she was with friends, one of whom, however,
could not get over the fact that she could
not get at the facts in the matter.</p>
<p>“See here, Leilah,” Violet Silverstairs said
aggrievedly, not once, but fifty times, “it is
downright mean of you to keep me in the dark.
What was it that he did? Tell me.”</p>
<p>The lady had known Verplank, as she had
known Leilah, ever since she had known anybody.
They had grown up together. Though
not related by blood, they were by choice,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_56">[56]</a></span>
which is sometimes thicker. In the circumstances
it was perhaps but natural that she
should call it mean, perhaps but human that
she should be aggrieved.</p>
<p>The puzzle of the situation she put before
her husband.</p>
<p>“What do you suppose it can be?” she asked.</p>
<p>But Silverstairs had no surmises to hazard.</p>
<p>“It must be something quite too dreadful,”
Violet continued. “One of those things, don’t
you know, that are said to change your whole
life. She just sits about and reads queer
books.”</p>
<p>“Queer books!” Silverstairs surprisedly repeated.</p>
<p>“Yes, books that tell of planes and rounds
and cycles and chains of lives and rebirths and
redeaths. She believes in them, too. She told
me so.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs tugged at his moustache. “She
might as well believe in the music of the
spheres.”</p>
<p>Violet looked at her lord. She loved him
as certain delicately organized women do love
men who are merely robust. But her affection
did not warp her judgment. She knew
that within his splendid physique was a spirit,
valiant perhaps, but obtuse.</p>
<p>“Well, why not?” she retorted. “Let a microphone<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_57">[57]</a></span>
receive from a steel plate the reflection
of a star, and sounds are emitted, tones peculiar
to the star itself. Those of the sun are
blatant. Those of Arcturus are like little bells.
Those of Sirius are as sobs from a zither.
Everybody knows that. Why shouldn’t she
believe in the music of the spheres?”</p>
<p>“Gammon!” cried this man who at Eton and
Christ Church had abundantly acquired everything
which is most useless. “I never heard
such rot.”</p>
<p>“I daresay, but that is not the point. The
point is that it is no joke to her.”</p>
<p>Nor was it. Leilah at first refused to go
anywhere, to see any one, to be present when
there were guests. But Violet, declaring that
she would have no moping in her diggings,
forced her. It was very reluctantly that Leilah
acceded. After a while she did so as a matter
of course. Finally, as was inevitable, she accepted
invitations elsewhere.</p>
<p>It was what Violet had aimed at, though not
at all at the result. Yet that, Leilah, who had
come to believe in karma, afterward regarded
as fate.</p>
<p>Presently, it so fell about that at one dinner
she had at her left a man whom she did not
know, whose name she had not caught and
with whom, during the preliminary courses,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_58">[58]</a></span>
she had not exchanged a word. As the dinner
progressed, cigarettes were served. Twice she
refused them. The second time, as she turned
again to the man at her right, she heard a cry,
across the table she saw a face, the eyes staring,
the features elongated. At once there was
an uproar, behind her there was a crash, she
was torn bodily from her chair, a piece of tapestry
had been thrown about her and in it
she was rolled on the floor by the man whom
she did not know.</p>
<p>Probably, at no dinner, anywhere, had a
woman suffered such indignities. She was so
telling herself when she realised, as she immediately
did realise, that the man and others
who had joined him, were but occupied in
saving her life. Her dress had caught fire
and it was in this flaming fashion, hurled on
the floor by a stranger and there brutalised by
him, that she made the acquaintance of Count
Kasimiérz Barouffski.</p>
<p>The sack of her costume forced her to return
to the rue François Premier, where at five
o’clock the next day, Barouffski appeared. He
appeared the day following, the day after, the
day after that.</p>
<p>These attentions Violet Silverstairs viewed
with suspicion.</p>
<p>“I verily believe,” she said to Leilah, “that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_59">[59]</a></span>
it was that polecat who set you on fire, and if he
did no one can convince me that he did not
do it on purpose.”</p>
<p>“Violet!”</p>
<p>“That’s right, fly at me. I thought you
would. Are you going to take him?”</p>
<p>In an elaborate drawing room in the rue
François Premier the two women were having
tea. Leilah, without replying, raised her cup.</p>
<p>Violet cocked an eye at her. “One would
have thought that you had had enough of
matrimony. But perhaps your intentions are
not honourable.”</p>
<p>Leilah reddened. “Violet!” she again exclaimed.</p>
<p>“My dear,” Lady Silverstairs resumed, “remember
that you are no longer in the States.
England is the most hypocritical country in
Europe. America is the most hypocritical
country in the world. That is what we call
progress. But France being old-fashioned
and behind the times is not censorious. I
admit, I used to be. But I am not censorious
any longer. I am not because any such <i lang="fr">état
d’âme</i> while advanced is not becoming.</p>
<p>“I am an old married woman,” added the
lady who was not twenty-two. “But if I were
not, if for instance I were like you, free, independent
and not a fright, and I had to choose<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_60">[60]</a></span>
between love and matrimony, it would not take
me a moment to decide. Not one.”</p>
<p>Leilah put down her cup. “Of course it
would not. If you had it to do again you
would marry Silverstairs and you would
marry for love. That is over for me, over forever.”</p>
<p>Narrowly, out of a corner of an eye, Violet
considered her. “He was such a brute, was
he?”</p>
<p>“Who? Gulian, do you mean?”</p>
<p>“I suppose so. There has been no other,
has there?”</p>
<p>“Violet!”</p>
<p>It was at this juncture, for the fiftieth time,
that Lady Silverstairs exclaimed:</p>
<p>“It is downright mean of you to keep me
in the dark. What was it that happened?
Make a soiled breast of it. Do!”</p>
<p>For the fiftieth time Leilah protested:</p>
<p>“Don’t ask me. Don’t. He knows and
that is enough. As for me I am trying to
forget.”</p>
<p>“And you think Barouffski will help you.
But has it ever occurred to you that if you
were not very rich he might lack the incentive?”</p>
<p>To this Leilah assented. “He said he is
poor.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_61">[61]</a></span></p>
<p>“At least he does not exaggerate. I told
Silverstairs that he was after you for your
money and he said that was what he married
me for. So he did and I married him for his
title. It was a fair bargain. Now if we had
it to do over I would say—I would say—well,
I would say that it is better to have loved your
husband than never to have loved at all. But
six months hence, if you had it to do over, do
you think you could say as much—or as little?”</p>
<p>“At least I could say that I did not marry
for a title.”</p>
<p>“Well, hardly, particularly a Polish one,
though I daresay even that might be useful in
the servants’ hall. But what could you say you
married for? It isn’t love?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Nor position?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Then what on earth——”</p>
<p>“Violet, how hard you make it for me.
Can’t you see that if I do, it will be for protection?”</p>
<p>“For protection! Merciful fathers! You
talk like a chorus girl! Protection against
what? Against whom? Verplank?”</p>
<p>“No.” Leilah choking down something in
her throat, replied: “Against myself.”</p>
<p>“I don’t understand you,” said Violet<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_62">[62]</a></span>
slowly. But she did or thought she did, and
that night told Silverstairs that Leilah was still
in love with her ex.</p>
<p>It was in these circumstances that Leilah
listened to the Count Kasimiérz Barouffski,
who, in telling her that he was poor, omitted to
add that he had resources. These were women
and cards. It is a business like another. But
even to his nearest friends, to Tyszkiewicz, a
compatriot, and Palencia, a Corsican, he did
not boast of it. He had therefore some sense
of shame, but not of honour, though with
humour he was supplied. A man with some
sense of humour and no sense of honour may
go far. Barouffski intended to. After his
volcanic introduction to Leilah, he beheld in
her not the woman but the opportunity which
chance had sent his way. To grasp that he
displayed every art of which the Slav is capable.
He did more. He impressed her not
with the nobility of his name but of his nature.
He was a good actor and though at first unsuccessful
he was not discouraged. It was an
axiom of his that among the dice of destiny
there is always a golden six. It was axiomatic
with him also that it is not tossed at once.
To deserve it, one must wait. Barouffski
waited. Presently fate shook the box before
him. The golden six was his.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_63">[63]</a></span></p>
<p>But not the box.</p>
<p>To Leilah the mere idea of matrimony
was abhorrent. Yet she could not stop indefinitely
with the Silverstairs. She had no relatives
with whom she could reside. She felt
that it would be awkward and perhaps equivocal
for her to have an establishment of her
own. But these considerations were minor beside
another—a sense, haunting and constant,
that the excursion to Nevada had been inadequate,
that the past needed a surer barricade.</p>
<p>It was not a husband that she wanted. Peace
and security were the flesh-pots that she craved.
These Barouffski offered or seemed to—and
it was these finally and these only that she
agreed to accept.</p>
<p>To the implied stipulation Barouffski consented
with an air of high chivalry but also
with an ambiguous smile. Given the golden
six of her income, the box was a detail to him,
and it was in these circumstances that over the
perhaps insecurely locked door of her past,
this mask mounted guard.</p>
<p>The news of the engagement, filtering
through the press, was cabled to the States, together
with the fact that Leilah was then stopping
in the rue François Premier with Lady
Silverstairs, whose portrait, in addition to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_64">[64]</a></span>
bogus presentments of the engaged couple,
were printed in the minor sheets that circulate
from New York to San Francisco.</p>
<p>On arriving from Australia at the latter city,
Verplank happened on a belated copy. Since
he had gone from Coronado, this, the first
news of his wife, was her engagement to another
man.</p>
<p>In his amazement his thoughts stuttered.
Into his mind entered stretches of night. He
looked at the sheet without seeing it. But the
paragraph and the purport of it, already photographed
on the films of the brain, were
prompting him unconsciously, and it was without
really knowing what he was saying that he
exclaimed:</p>
<p>“Leilah! My wife! In Paris! Engaged
to another man!”</p>
<p>The names, the words, the meaning of
them all, beat on his brain like blows of a
hammer.</p>
<p>“Leilah! My wife! In Paris! Engaged!”</p>
<p>Again he looked at the sheet. “What a
damned lie!” he ragingly cried, and, rumpling
the paper, threw it from him.</p>
<p>But now, the names, the words, the meaning
of them all, well beaten into him, readjusted
themselves, presenting a picture perfectly defined
and possibly real.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_65">[65]</a></span></p>
<p>He stooped, gathered the paper, smoothed
it, read the account again.</p>
<p>After all, he reflected, it might be that she
was in Paris and, if there, it was natural that
she would be with Violet Silverstairs. These
two items were, therefore, not improbably correct.
That view reached, the deduction followed:
If they are correct, the other may be.
Yet, in that case, he argued, obviously she must
think me dead. On the heels of this second deduction
an impression trod—the ease and dispatch
with which she had become consoled.</p>
<p>Enraged at once, angered already by what
he had taken for a lie and then infuriated by
what he took for truth, the anterior incidents
that had this supreme outrage for climax,
leaped at him. At the onslaught the primitive
passions flared, and it was with the impulse of
the homicide that he determined to seek and
overwhelm this woman who accepted men and
matters with such entire sans-gêne.</p>
<p>On the morrow he left for New York. Before
going he sent a cablegram to the address
which the paper had supplied:</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p><i>Am just apprised of the studied insult of
your engagement to some foreign cad. Leaving
for Paris at once.</i></p></div>
<p>As he signed it, deeply, beneath the breath,
he swore. “That will show her,” he added.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_66">[66]</a></span></p>
<p>It so happened that it showed her nothing.
Leilah was not then in the rue François
Premier, but in the rue de la Pompe, where
the message followed, but only to be received
by Barouffski, who read it with a curious
smile.</p>
<p>Already he hated Verplank, who had not
yet acquired a hatred for him. But though
that hatred had not been acquired, it developed
tumultuously when, on arriving in New
York, he learned that not merely the report of
the engagement was true, but that the engagement
had since resulted in a marriage, which
itself had been preceded by a Nevada divorce.</p>
<p>In comparison to all that had occurred, the
divorce seemed at the time almost negligible.
It was the crowning infamy of this marriage
which, in renewing the primitive passions,
aroused in Verplank a determination not
merely to seek and overwhelm the woman, but
to seek and destroy the man. The marriage,
he decided could be but the result of an anterior
affair, there was no other explanation of
it. The idea that had come to him at Coronado,
the possibility that she might have left
him because informed of some affair of his
own and which since then he had examined
again and again, fell utterly away. It was not
because of errors of his that she had gone, but<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_67">[67]</a></span>
for turpitudes of her own. Then to his anger
at her was added a hatred of Barouffski, whom
he had never seen, and who, without having
seen Verplank, hated him also, hated him retrospectively
and prospectively, hated him because
clearly Leilah had been his and—where
women are concerned, all things being possible—might
be again.</p>
<p>But though Barouffski hated Verplank actively,
he hated him vaguely, as one must when
one hates the unknown. It was the cablegram
which, in supplying the personal element,
made the hate concrete.</p>
<p>“Foreign cad, eh?” he repeated, with a curious
smile. “Eh bien, nous verrons, we shall
see.”</p>
<p>Presently the opportunity occurred. For it
was in these circumstances, a fortnight after
the receipt of the cablegram, that, directed by
the young Baronne de Fresnoy, he turned and
saw Verplank entering the room where he
stood.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_68">[68]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_69">[69]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="IV">IV</a></h2>
<p>With the unerring instinct of the man of the
world, Verplank, on entering the crowded
salon, divined immediately, among all the
women present, the hostess whom he had never
seen.</p>
<p>As he bent over her hand, the duchess, who
had not an idea how he came there, said in her
fluted voice:</p>
<p>“This is really so nice of you. I did not
know you were in Paris.”</p>
<p>“Nor did I—until this moment,” answered
Verplank, looking as he spoke into the eyes
of his hostess who, after the one imperceptible
glance with which the mondaine judges and
classifies, was wondering in what manner, this
man, with his virile face and impeccable presence,
had forced Leilah Barouffska to leave
him.</p>
<p>“But,” he added, “Monsieur de Joyeuse
whom I saw this afternoon told me that you
would be at home, and assured me that I
might venture to present my homages.”</p>
<p>The duchess displayed her tireless smile.
“I am only sorry not to have had them sooner.”<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_70">[70]</a></span>
She paused. Between her smile, the edges of
her teeth showed, false but beautiful. “There
is Lady Silverstairs trying to get you to look
at her, and very well worth looking at she is.”</p>
<p>Camille de Joyeuse turned for a moment
to the reticent young prince who in his diffident
way still lingered at her side.</p>
<p>Beyond, at the farther end of the room,
notes rippled. Standing near a grand piano,
the Roumanian with the flowing hair was
preluding a fantasy of his own.</p>
<p>In the hush that succeeded, Verplank moved
to where Violet sat.</p>
<p>Smilingly, without speaking, she gave him
her hand and indicated a seat beside her.
Then, raising a fan, she whispered:</p>
<p>“Demon! What have you done? Where
do you spring from? How long have you
been in Paris?”</p>
<p>Verplank, seating himself, answered:</p>
<p>“I got here this morning. Why am I a
demon?”</p>
<p>From behind the fan, Violet asked:</p>
<p>“What did you do to Leilah? Why did she
leave you?”</p>
<p>Verplank folded his gloved hands. “That
is what I am here to find out.”</p>
<p>“Do you mean to tell me that you don’t
know!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_71">[71]</a></span></p>
<p>“I have not an idea—unless it was because of
this Count Thingumagig.”</p>
<p>Violet Silverstairs furled her fan, looked at
him, looked away, looked about the room. At
one end her husband, accompanied by de
Joyeuse, Tempest, de Fresnoy, and the others,
had entered. At the further end the Roumanian
dominated. Supported en sourdine by
an accompanist, he massed sounds and dispersed
them, concentrating fulgurations of
notes from which echoing showers fell. Presently,
resuming an abandoned measure, he
caressed a largo, infinitely sweet, that swooned
in the languors of the finale. At once to a
murmur of bravos, the applause of gloved
hands and a cry of “Bis!” raising violin and
bow above his head, he bent double to the
duchess, his flowing hair falling like a veil
before him.</p>
<p>“He may play again,” said Violet. “I want
to talk to you. Let us go into the next
room.”</p>
<p>As Verplank rose at her bidding, others who
had been seated, rose also. Interrupted conversations
were more animatedly resumed. A
servant announced additional names. The first
salon now was thronged. The second was
filled. Verplank and Violet passed on.</p>
<p>Beyond was a gallery. At the entrance<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_72">[72]</a></span>
stood a woman, her face averted, talking to a
man. As the others approached, she turned.</p>
<p>At sight of her and of the man, Violet would
have turned also. It was too late.</p>
<p>“Leilah!” Verplank exclaimed.</p>
<p>For a second, in tragic silence, two beings
whom love had joined and fate had separated,
stood, staring into each other’s eyes.</p>
<p>For a second only. At once the man interposed
himself between them.</p>
<p>“Monsieur!” he insolently threw out. “My
name is Barouffski.”</p>
<p>With superior tact Lady Silverstairs intervened.
“Good evening, Count. It never occurred
to us that we were interrupting a tête-à-tête.”</p>
<p>She paused. Hostilely the two men were
measuring each other. In Verplank’s face
there was a threat, in Barouffski’s there was a
jeer, in Leilah’s there was an expression of
absolute terror. Of the little group Violet
alone appeared at ease.</p>
<p>“Leilah,” she added, “don’t forget that
you are to have luncheon with me to-morrow.
Good night, my dear. Silverstairs
and I will be going soon. Good night,
Barouffski.”</p>
<p>She smiled, nodded, took Verplank’s arm,
took him away. But the arm beneath her hand<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_73">[73]</a></span>
was shaking and she realised that it shook
with rage.</p>
<p>Sympathetically she looked up at him. “I
thought they were in the other room and it
was just to avoid a thing of this sort that I
got you out of it. You won’t do anything,
will you?”</p>
<p>Verplank now had got control of himself,
his arm no longer shook, and it was the smile
of a man of the world, the smile of one to
whom nothing is important and much absurd,
that he answered:</p>
<p>“Why, yes; it was very civil of this chap
to introduce himself. I shall leave a card on
him. Hello! Here’s Silverstairs! I wonder
if he will introduce himself, too.”</p>
<p>The young earl was advancing, his hand
outstretched. “I say! I saw a man marching
off with the missis, but I had no idea it
was you. Where are you stopping? Will you
dine with us Tuesday?”</p>
<p>“Yes, do.” Violet threw in. “Rue François
Premier at eight.”</p>
<p>“I shall be very glad to,” Verplank answered.
He turned to Silverstairs. “I am at
the Ritz. Stop by there to-morrow noon,
won’t you, and let me take you somewhere for
luncheon?”</p>
<p>Lady Silverstairs laughed and employing a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_74">[74]</a></span>
darkyism, said: “You don’t say turkey to me.
There!” she exclaimed as Verplank was about
to protest. “I could not anyway.”</p>
<p>From the salon beyond came a woman’s
voice, clear and rich, rendering, in a lascive
contralto, a song of love and passion.</p>
<p>The Silverstairs and Verplank approached.
Meanwhile, from the diva’s mouth, notes
darted like serpents on fire. In mounting
fervour the aria developed, trailing, as it
climbed, words such as <i lang="it">amore</i>, <i lang="it">speranza</i>, <i lang="it">morir</i>.
A breath of brutality passed. The atmosphere
became charged with emanations in which the
perfume of women mingled with the desires
of men. Still the aria mounted, it coloured
the air, projecting, like a magic lantern, visions
of delight, imperial and archaic, that ascended
in glittering scales.</p>
<p>Verplank, detaching himself from the Silverstairs,
felt his dumb rage renewed. At the
moment he conceived an insane idea of going
below, waiting without until Barouffski and
Leilah appeared and he saw himself, confronting
the man, tearing the woman from him,
carrying her off and making her his own.</p>
<p>The impulse fell from him. The rage that
he felt at the man deflected into rage at this
woman who had made his life a vacant house
and for what, good God! And why?</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_75">[75]</a></span></p>
<p>In a cascade of flowers and flames the song
was ending. There was new applause, the
discreet approbation of worldly people, easily
pleased, as easily bored and with but one sure
creed: Not too much of anything.</p>
<p>Verplank must also have had enough. When
presently the Silverstairs looked about for him
he had gone.</p>
<p>Already Violet had summarised the situation
to her lord. Now, perplexed at Verplank’s
abrupt disappearance, she said:</p>
<p>“You don’t suppose that anything will happen,
do you?”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, bored by the entertainment,
anxious only to get away where he could have
a quiet drink, tugged at his moustache and
with unconscious reminiscence answered:</p>
<p>“I don’t know and I don’t care. I don’t
care what happens as long as it doesn’t happen
to me.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_76">[76]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_77">[77]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="V">V</a></h2>
<p>“There are too many of us,” Verplank, the
day following, found himself saying to Silverstairs.</p>
<p>The two men were lunching at Voisin’s.</p>
<p>The charming resort which, since the passing
of Véry, of Véfour and the Maison Dorée,
has become the ultimate refuge of the high
gastronomic muse of Savarin and of Brisse
was, on this forenoon, filled with its usual
clientèle:—old men with pink cheeks, young
women with ravishing hats, cosmopolitan
sportsmen, ladies of both worlds, assortments
of what Paris calls High Life and pronounces
Hig Leaf.</p>
<p>Without, a fog draped the windows, blurred
the movement of the street, transforming it
into a cinematograph of misty silhouettes. But
within, the brilliant damask, the glittering
service, the studied excellence of everything,
produced an atmosphere of wealth and ease.</p>
<p>Silverstairs, after swallowing a glass of
Chablis, meditatively lit a cigar. But meditation
was not his forte. The twentieth of his
name, he was tall and robust. He had straw-coloured<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_78">[78]</a></span>
hair, blue eyes, a skin of brick, and
an appearance of simple placidity. At the
moment he was mentally fondling certain
reminiscences of the Isis and certain bouts with
bargees there.</p>
<p>“You know,” he said at last, “if I were you I
would just march up to him and knock him
down.”</p>
<p>Verplank nodded. “I dare say. But not if
he had taken your wife.”</p>
<p>The suggestion, penetrating the earl’s placidity,
punctured it. He threw back his head.
“By George! If he had, I’d kill him.”</p>
<p>“There, you see!”</p>
<p>Silverstairs puffed at his cigar. His placidity
now was reforming itself.</p>
<p>“Yes,” he answered. “But then in taking
yours, he did it after she was divorced. You
can’t have him out for that.”</p>
<p>“All the same there are one too many of
us.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs filled his mouth with smoke.
Longly, with an air of considering the situation
he expelled it. Then he said:</p>
<p>“It is what I call damned awkward. But
what the deuce can you do?”</p>
<p>“What can I do?” Verplank with an uplift
of the chin repeated. “Why, if only for the
manner in which he acted last night—”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_79">[79]</a></span></p>
<p>“I know,” Silverstairs interrupted. “The
missis told me. He behaved like a fidgety
Frenchman. I grant you that. But there were
no words, nothing that you could put a finger
on.”</p>
<p>Through an adjacent door a man strolled in.
He had his hat on and in one gloved hand he
held a thin umbrella of which the handle was
studded with gold nails. With the other hand
he smoothed a black moustache. Through a
monocle he was surveying the room. He
looked careless and cynical.</p>
<p>Deferentially a maître d’hôtel addressed
him. Ignoring the man he waved his umbrella
at Silverstairs.</p>
<p>Silverstairs waved his hand. He turned to
Verplank. “Here’s de Fresnoy. He can put
us straight. Let’s ask him to join us.”</p>
<p>Rising, he greeted the Parisian, invited him
to the table, introduced Verplank, speaking as
he did so in French, with an accent frankly
barbarous which de Fresnoy seemed to enjoy.</p>
<p>The latter raised his hat to Verplank, confided
it to the maître d’hôtel, gave him the
umbrella also, while another waiter drew up
for him a chair.</p>
<p>“Thanks,” he said in an interval of these
operations. “I see you have breakfasted. If
you don’t mind my eating while you smoke—”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_80">[80]</a></span></p>
<p>Seating himself he turned to the waiter, a
man short and stout, completely bald, with
large dyed whiskers and an air of repressed
satisfaction.</p>
<p>“Listen, Léopold, and note well what I say.
To begin with do not attempt to tell me what
you wish me to eat. You have heard? Good!
Listen again. A dozen Ostendes, an omelette, a
pear. Nothing else. Not a crumb. Yes, some
Eau de Vals. Allez!”</p>
<p>Léopold bowed. “Perfectly, monsieur le
baron. I shall have the honour of serving
monsieur le baron with what he has been good
enough to be willing to desire.”</p>
<p>Again the waiter bowed. But behind the
oleaginousness of his speech a severity had
entered, one which intimated that in this preserve
of gastronomics such an order was unworthy.</p>
<p>“These gentlemen?” he added, his eyes moving
from Verplank to Silverstairs. “Some
coffee? A liqueur?”</p>
<p>But now, in fluent French, Verplank was addressing
de Fresnoy. “Silverstairs and I have
been having an argument. In your quality of
Parisian, will you tell us whether a man can
have another out for looking impertinently at
him?”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy adjusted his collar, patted his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_81">[81]</a></span>
neck-cloth. “But certainly, most assuredly.
To look impertinently at a man constitutes an
attack on his self esteem, which in itself is an
integral part of his moral wealth. To omit to
return a man’s bow, to neglect to take his
proffered hand, to regard him in an offensive
manner, are one and all so many assaults on
his dignity.”</p>
<p>Verplank, pleased with this view of things,
smiled. “Thanks. Mine has been assailed and
I was in doubt how to rebuke the aggressor.”</p>
<p>“It is simple as Good day. You have only
to select two representatives and get them to
put themselves in communication with him. If
then he refuses to have friends of his meet
yours, or if, afterward, he will neither apologise
or fight, he is outlawed.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy, as he spoke, made a gesture, a
wide movement of the arm which indicated, or
was intended to indicate, the uttermost limits
of the world.</p>
<p>“It is Barouffski,” Silverstairs, with some
idea that de Fresnoy might be aware of the
anterior complication, threw out.</p>
<p>“Barouffski!” de Fresnoy repeated, his head
held appreciatively a little to one side. “In a
bout he is very clever. Barring d’Arcy,
Helley-Quetgen”—and myself he was about to
add, but throwing the veil he desisted—“I<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_82">[82]</a></span>
don’t know his equal. How he is on the field,
personally I cannot say. But there, the absence
of buttons, the absence of masks, the inevitable
emotion, the sight of the other man, the consciousness
of an injury to be maintained or
avenged, the consciousness too of the definite
character of any thrust you may give and particularly
of any thrust you may receive, these
things have such an effect that often the cleverest
acts like a fool. On the boards, fencing is
an exercise, it is an amusement. On the field,
it is another man’s blood—or yours. Though,
after all, one is rarely killed except by one’s
seconds.”</p>
<p>He turned to Verplank. “You fence? Or
is it that you shoot?”</p>
<p>Verplank leaned back in his chair. “Oh, I
suppose I can fire a gun.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs laughed. “I say now! You are
too modest by half.” He looked at de Fresnoy.
“Verplank is one of the crack shots of
America.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy turned again to Verplank.
“You should demand pistols then. Barouffski
draws well, but at twenty paces he is less sure
of himself. Have you selected your seconds?”</p>
<p>“I suppose I may count on Silverstairs for
one——”</p>
<p>The young earl nodded. “That’s of course,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_83">[83]</a></span>
and perhaps you, de Fresnoy, will act with
me.”</p>
<p>The Parisian smoothed his moustache. “I
shall be much honoured. In that case, however,
as necessary preliminary, I shall have
to ask to be made acquainted with all the circumstances.”</p>
<p>But now Léopold, bearing a dish on which
were oysters green as stagnant scum, approached
and with an air of infinite tenderness,
much as though it were a baby, placed it before
de Fresnoy.</p>
<p>Leisurely he began to eat.</p>
<p>Verplank, who had been looking out of the
window, leaned forward. “The circumstances
are evangelical in their simplicity. Last evening
I was about to speak to Madame Barouffska
when he put himself between us and
eyed me in the manner which I have described.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy, considering him over an oyster,
said:</p>
<p>“You were at the Joyeuses then?”</p>
<p>Verplank nodded.</p>
<p>“And there Barouffski objected to your
speaking to his wife?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy swallowed the oyster. “In that
case he was guilty not only of a grave offense<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_84">[84]</a></span>
to you, but to Madame de Joyeuse as well.
The duke would be the first to resent it.”</p>
<p>With an idea of making it all very clear,
Silverstairs put an oar in: “Madame Barouffska,
you know, was formerly Madame Verplank.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy bent a little. It may be that
because of Silverstairs’ ultra English accent
he had not understood. “Pardon?”</p>
<p>But here Verplank intervened. “This lady
had been divorced from me before she married
Barouffski.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy, over another oyster, turned to
him again. Yet any surprise he may have experienced
he was too civil to display.</p>
<p>“Ah, indeed!” he replied. He looked as
though he were about to add something, but
refraining, he paused.</p>
<p>Verplank helped him out. “You are thinking
perhaps that there may have been circumstances
that rendered further acquaintance between
us inadmissible. I may assure you that
there are none and, without wishing to intrude
my private affairs, I may assure you also that
to this hour I am unaware why the divorce was
obtained. This lady had no grievance of any
kind against me and I had none whatever
against her.”</p>
<p>Pontifically, in his deepest note, Silverstairs<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_85">[85]</a></span>
threw out: “In the States they give you a
divorce for a Yes or a No.”</p>
<p>“For married people,” de Fresnoy remarked,
yet so pleasantly that the sarcasm was lost,
“America is the coming country.”</p>
<p>As he spoke, the fat waiter, after supervising
the removal of the first dish, produced,
with the air of a conjurer, another. It was an
omelette, golden without, frothy within.</p>
<p>De Fresnoy glanced up. “Countermand the
pear. Instead, bring me paper and ink.”</p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le baron.”</p>
<p>Slowly de Fresnoy attacked the food. After
a mouthful he said to Silverstairs:</p>
<p>“When the writing materials come we can
get off a note to Barouffski. If he has any explanation
he can advance it. Otherwise—on
guard!”</p>
<p>After another mouthful he said to Verplank:</p>
<p>“You have fought before?”</p>
<p>“I have not had the occasion.”</p>
<p>“Nor I,” interjected Silverstairs. “It is
against the law in England.”</p>
<p>Gravely, as though he were receiving valuable
information de Fresnoy bowed. “So it
is here. But with us it is custom that rules,
not law. No jury would convict an honourable
man for fighting a fair fight. Besides,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_86">[86]</a></span>
dueling is in our blood. It will not disappear
as chivalry has. It will last as long as there
are French men—and French women. And
yet, in saying that chivalry has disappeared, I
am in error. Not later than the week before
last a cousin of mine, a young man truly
charming, married a monster.”</p>
<p>He pushed aside his plate. “Well, then,
Léopold, am I to sit here the entire day?”</p>
<p>Serviceably, a buvard in his hand, the waiter
approached. “I have subventioned a new pen
for the use of monsieur le baron.”</p>
<p>“There, Léopold, your sins are remitted.
See at once if the chasseur is free.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy looked at Silverstairs. “With
your permission, in our joint names, I
write.”</p>
<p>He looked at Verplank. “Will you pardon
me if I ask how your name is spelled?”</p>
<p>Verplank, getting at his case, extracted a
card.</p>
<p>De Fresnoy glanced at it. Then, taking that
new pen, he read, as he wrote, aloud.</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p class="noic"><i>M. le Comte Barouffski.</i></p>
<p><i>Monsieur: M. Verplank has requested the Earl of
Silverstairs and myself to arrive at an understanding
with two of your friends concerning an incident which
occurred last evening in the Avenue Cours la Reine.</i></p>
<p><i>Lord Silverstairs and I will be obliged if, as soon as</i><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_87">[87]</a></span>
<i>possible, you will ask one of your friends to appoint a
meeting at which we may deliberate.</i></p>
<p><i>Receive, Monsieur, the expression of my distinguished
sentiments.</i></p>
<p class="right"><i>Baron de Fresnoy</i></p>
</div>
<p>He looked over at Silverstairs. “Is that to
your liking? Good! We will send it to the
Little Club where the answer is to be left and
we will have a reply to-day. En attendant,
there are matters that claim me.”</p>
<p>With a movement of the chin he summoned
the waiter.</p>
<p>A little byplay followed; the presentation
of the bill, the click of gold on porcelain, the
carelessly gathered change, the meagre tip, the
reappearance of the hat, the bowing waiters,
the craning necks, and the departure of de
Fresnoy, an umbrella under his arm, a cigar
between his teeth.</p>
<p>Verplank, emptying a glass of Chablis,
looked out of the window. A panorama was
forming. He saw the room at Coronado,
Leilah as she told him of her love, his brief
absence, his harrowing return, the hunt for
her that had extended over half the globe, a
hunt that divorce had not terminated, which
her re-marriage had not stopped and which,
had he not at last discovered her, nothing
could have stayed save his death or hers or the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_88">[88]</a></span>
reason of the implacable Why. An obstacle
to the Why or, it might be, the incarnation of
it, was Barouffski, and Verplank saw himself
standing somewhere with Barouffski before
him. There was a command, the call of numbers,
a detonation and the sight of Barouffski
turning, swaying, falling down.</p>
<p>The panorama faded. A picture had appeared.
Before the window, arrested by a
congestion of traffic, a motor was stopping.
In it and the mist was Leilah.</p>
<p>Verplank sprang to his feet. With the idea
of going out to her there and forcing an explanation,
he looked about for his hat.</p>
<p>Silverstairs also got up. He had not seen.
He too was looking for his hat. Placidly he
remarked:</p>
<p>“I have an appointment with a chap named
Tempest. Will you come with me?”</p>
<p>But now, the congestion relieved, the motor
shot on. Verplank had the spectacle of a face
fading instantly in the fog and the future.</p>
<p>“Will you?” Silverstairs repeated.</p>
<p>“Will I what?”</p>
<p>“I have to see a man about a horse. He
lives just off the Bois de Boulogne, in the rue
de la Pompe. Will you come up there with
me?”</p>
<p>“Yes, if you will go on foot. In that case<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_89">[89]</a></span>
I’ll leave you there and walk back. I need the
exercise. I feel like what you described as a
fidgety Frenchman.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs pulled at his moustache. “It’s
no end of a walk. But no matter, I’ll go with you.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_90">[90]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_91">[91]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="VI">VI</a></h2>
<p>That morning Leilah had two appointments,
one with a modiste, the other with Violet
Silverstairs. She did not feel equal to either.
The episode of the previous evening had been
to her like the supreme torture which medieval
legislation devised. It was all she could bear—and
more!</p>
<p>When, abruptly, she found herself face to
face with Verplank, it was as though she were
confronted by the dead. The sense of it numbed
her, and the numbness was heightened by a
horror that has no name. Into the seats of
thought there entered the realisation that, in
spite of all, she still loved him, that in spite
of all he still loved her. In the core of these
convictions fear entered, fear of him, fear of
herself, a sensation of common peril and
mutual perdition so blinding that Barouffski’s
rudeness she barely noticed, and it was with a
look the damned may have that she saw
Verplank turn with Violet Silverstairs,
and go.</p>
<p>As they passed, Barouffski, with the air of
one commenting on a triviality, remarked:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_92">[92]</a></span></p>
<p>“How odd it is that the Joyeuses should care
to hobnob with demi-castors. Shall we go?”</p>
<p>That demi-castors meant bounders generally,
and, in this instance, specifically, she would,
ordinarily, have been insufficiently familiar
with the slang of the boulevards to know. But
she did not hear. Moreover, the remark required
no reply. Even otherwise she was unable
to speak, and it was not until Barouffski
reiterated his suggestion that mechanically she
acceded to it with a movement of the head.</p>
<p>Her demeanor then in traversing the salons,
her leave-taking of the duchess, her bearing in
descending the stairs, were as mechanical as her
reply to Barouffski, and it was not until after
the motor had dropped him, as he had asked
that it should, at the door of the Little Club,
that, at last alone, the mental anchylosis fell by.</p>
<p>At once in a sort of retrograde vision, she
relived the past. There had been the flight
from Coronado, the halt at Salt Lake, the
descent into Nevada, the divorce, the journey
abroad, the platonic marriage to Barouffski.
These—the succeeding episodes in the drama
of her life—were so many hostages to joy,
barricades thrown one after another between
Verplank and herself, and unavailingly
thrown, since, with but a look, they were almost
destroyed.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_93">[93]</a></span></p>
<p>They had seemed wholly impregnable, but
she knew then that unless reinforced by surer
bars, they would one and all collapse. At the
foreknowledge of that she appreciated what
the heroines in the old tragedies endured, when
circled by the seven-times-twisted coil of fate.
Yet, though they had yielded, she would not
yield, and it was with this determination that
she alighted in the rue de la Pompe.</p>
<p>The house there had a church for neighbour,
and stood between a court and a garden.
Before the court was a high, white wall. The
garden extended back to the parallel street,
where, also, was a wall. The entrance to the
court was a double doorway, the entrance to
the garden was an iron gate. Between the
gate and the house were large urns, a marble
bench, a marble chair, most noticeably the
kennels of two mastiffs, pets of Barouffski who,
at whatever hour he returned at night, had
them loosed. They were, he declared, a great
protection, as indeed they were—for him.
Apart from the occasional barking of these
dogs, barring also occasional music from the
church, usually the garden was quiet. But
that was in the order of things. It lacked both
stable and garage. These had been secured
elsewhere.</p>
<p>Except for that detail, the arrangements generally<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_94">[94]</a></span>
were satisfactory. The house was
commodious, agreeably furnished. On the
ground floor were the usual offices, beneath
which the servants slept. On the floor above
were the salons and dining hall. Above these
were the bedrooms. On this upper floor the
apartment which Barouffski occupied gave on
the street, while Leilah’s overlooked the
garden.</p>
<p>Adjacent to her suite was a stairway designed
for servants, but which, because of its
convenience, she occasionally used. It led
directly to the dining hall, and from there she
could descend into the garden.</p>
<p>It had a superior advantage. It enabled her
to avoid the hazards of the main stairway,
which was used by Barouffski, whom nearer
acquaintance had discovered to her without
the mask—without one mask, that is—for histrion
that he was, he had many, but the best,
the feigned nobility of noble pride, the assumed
parage, had gone.</p>
<p>In its place was a smile, constant, equivocal,
ambiguous, a smile such as the consciously
damned may display. It gave Leilah little
creeps. She dreaded it, dreaded him, dreaded
both, what is worse she dreaded instinctively,
without knowing why. The man was amiable,
serviceable, gallant. He wore his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_95">[95]</a></span>
domino not faultlessly perhaps but with the
fine air of a bravo who, when the time comes,
will knife you, yes, but who in so doing will
rather require that you admire the chasing on
the handle of the blade. As yet the knife was
concealed. But Leilah felt that it was there.
He knew it was. Occasionally he fingered the
point.</p>
<p>Hitherto he had lived by expedients. A
golden six had been tossed him. He had
pocketed it. For him the economic problem of
life was solved. He asked little else, merely
that the solution should endure and that his
dignity, of which he had a humorous conception,
be outwardly preserved. In addition to
his dignity, or to his idea of it, he had another
attribute. He was not exacting. It is a great
charm in any one. But with him it did not extend
to money. Freely he demanded it, freely
she gave and it was precisely when he demanded
it that she felt, and he felt, too, the point
of the knife.</p>
<p>On this evening when, after the usual din at
the doors, the motor entered the court and she
alighted at the perron, two footmen busied
themselves in aiding her.</p>
<p>Leilah passed through the dining room to
the garden where for a while she walked along
the path that led from the house to the gate.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_96">[96]</a></span></p>
<p>The garden was cloistered, the night serene.
The influences of both affected her. The darkness
put her thoughts into relief, the solitude
relaxed the tension of her nerves.</p>
<p>Another thing was helpful, the determination
which she had reached, though for that
determination to be maintained there must,
she saw, be further hostages, new barricades.
But what further hostages could she give she
wondered, what firmer barricades was it possible
to erect? Barring flight or an appeal to
Verplank, some message begging him to leave
Paris, she could not imagine any. Flight she
had already tried, but not flight to some one of
the world’s far away places where any one may
be lost forever. It was a miserably dismal
thing to do, she reflected, a thing so dismal and
so miserable that she doubted her ability to do
it.</p>
<p>As she thought it over she wondered if in
some former existence she could have injured
Verplank and whether it were by way of
retribution that he had the power to tempt and
torture her now. Tenets of this character the
<cite>Vidyâ</cite> advanced and as she had told Tempest,
she had come to believe in that Scripture as
many do in the Bible, though as many also do
without being able to accept it entirely, without
being able to accept for instance stories<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_97">[97]</a></span>
such as that of Jonah and the whale which none
the less all would accept were it known how
profound is the symbolism behind them. With
like reservations, Leilah accepted the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>.
She was very ignorant as women in her station
generally are and the reservations were due to
that ignorance and also to the demand which
the doctrine made on her imagination. But
though she was ignorant she was conscious of
it and consciousness of ignorance is usually the
condition precedent to enlightenment.</p>
<p>Now, in considering the episode of the evening,
she asked herself whether she was warranted
in accepting this creed of past lives.
At the Joyeuses, during the announcements of
resonant names, Tempest had said that unless
we swallow the ridiculous dogma of a
soul specially created at every birth and unless
too we are indecent enough to fancy the Deity
waiting for that purpose on the passions and
caprices of man, we have to accept it, have to
accept with it the corollary of past actions and
their consequences, have to accept, too, the deduction
that, in accordance with our past
actions, it is we who reward or punish ourselves,
we who become avenging furies or angels
of light.</p>
<p>Leilah wished that she could have discussed
the matter more fully with Tempest yet she felt<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_98">[98]</a></span>
that what he had said was logical, but if it
were true, then the parallel doctrine that all
misdeeds and with them all misfortunes spring
from desire must be true also, in which case,
before their consequences can be effaced,
all misdeeds must be atoned. But how can
they be atoned? she asked herself. Presently
she remembered. According to the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>, any
desire no matter what, desire for pleasure, for
gain, for attainments, for honours, even the
desire for spiritual perfection, even the desire
for the lack of desire, must be extinguished before
old scores are paid. That was the way
she saw, the only way. The debtor must sacrifice
himself to himself.</p>
<p>But, uncertain still, she went over the matter
again, putting to it little tests, passably naïf
yet serviceable to her. She had ardently desired
to marry Verplank, then, desiring as ardently
a barricade against him, she had married
Barouffski. In the one case the result had
been catastrophic; in the other, calamitous.
Doubtless she had sinned in the past and these
disasters, brought about by her own desires,
were her punishment. There were other
things that she had desired. She had wanted to
be loved, she had wanted to be thought a
beauty, and not only her love had shamed her
but soon she might be ashamed to show her<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_99">[99]</a></span>
face. At the thought of these things she realised
anew and more profoundly than ever that
selfish desire is the root of evil and that
only in its extirpation may peace be had. But
coincidently she realised also that any such
extirpation was beyond her. Heredity, environment,
the circumstances of her life, had
given an impetus to desire which she could not
arrest. She liked wealth, ease, pretty clothes,
becoming hats, the society of agreeable people.
She liked the world and in liking it she feared
that she liked also the flesh, it might be even
that she liked, too, the devil. Yet, she must not,
she knew.</p>
<p>In telling herself that, she thought of the
Church. The Church was so much more comfortable.
There you were not asked impossibilities,
the one requirement was to throw
yourself in her arms and repent. As the
facile process occurred to her she recalled
George Moore’s story of <cite>Evelyn Innes</cite>. That
masterwork seemed to tell her to do
as the heroine had done and go in a
convent.</p>
<p>Perhaps she might, she thought. Perhaps
she must.</p>
<p>Several times already she had crossed and
recrossed the garden. Now she found herself
at the farther end facing the iron gate.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_100">[100]</a></span>
Leilah opened it, walked to the corner and
returned.</p>
<p>The little tentative evasion had been successful.
At any time, unseen even by a servant,
she could leave the house, disappear utterly,
be forever ingulfed. But the knowledge that
she could escape into darkness and be lost
there, offered little more than a choice between
tears. It presented a form of suicide
which was superior only to actual death. She
hoped she might be spared it. She hoped an
appeal to Verplank would suffice, though in
what manner it could best reach him, or, for
that matter, reach him at all, she found it
difficult to decide. To make it personally was
impossible. To attempt it through Violet Silverstairs
would involve an explanation and
that was impossible also. The idea of employing
one of her women occurred to her.
There were manifest objections to such a
course, though the particular woman whom
she had in view she trusted entirely.</p>
<p>Slowly she returned to the house and went
to her room. There, when at last the servants
had gone and she was alone, she knelt on a prie-dieu
and, to the Watchers of the Seven
Spheres, prayed for the earthly peace of her
soul and of his. She knew that no prayer could
affect them, she knew that they are not to be<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_101">[101]</a></span>
propitiated or coerced, but it soothed her as
prayer, in raising the vibrations, does soothe
the distressed. The prayer concluded she began
another. She prayed that sometime she
might be somewhere, on some plane, where
all things broken are made complete and found
again things vanished.</p>
<p>Then, the solace of it still upon her, suddenly
she saw by what the prayer had been
induced. The consciousness confused and presently,
in the melancholy sotto-voce of thought,
she told herself that to extinguish that desire,
she would have to be in Dharmakaya—the
mystic state where there is oblivion of all
things here.</p>
<p>“Here!” she caught herself repeating. For,
at once, a passage from the <cite>Upanishads</cite>
prompting, she remembered that here means
Myalba, which is hell, the greatest of all hells
and, for those of this evolution, the only hell
there is.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_102">[102]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_103">[103]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="VII">VII</a></h2>
<p>It was on the morning succeeding these
incidents that Leilah felt unequal for the appointments
she had made. But however she
felt, she always did what she had planned.
In this instance nature punished her. On the
way to the first appointment, a malaise overtook
her, enveloped her, beat at her and although,
gradually, it fell by, she was still conscious
of it when, in the rue Cambon, the motor
stopped at the modiste’s door.</p>
<p>“The fitting of madame la comtesse Barouffska!”
a fair young girl in black immediately
and authoritatively announced.</p>
<p>Before landscapes of silk, in the delight of
new modes, customers were sunning themselves.
At the announcement they turned,
while Leilah, conducted by another girl who
had advanced to meet her, crossed the laboratory
of enchantments and entered an adjoining
room.</p>
<p>But, for the moment, the fitting was delayed.
The première was elsewhere occupied. When
presently she appeared she excitedly exclaimed:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_104">[104]</a></span></p>
<p>“I hope I have not detained madame. I am
desolated if I have. But! But! If madame
knew! One is literally torn to pieces! All
day long it is nothing but Ernestine that
dress! Ernestine, that robe! Ernestine, that
costume! Ernestine this! Ernestine that!
Truly madame, there are moments when I
say I die! I go crazy!”</p>
<p>Abruptly dropping her voice, she added:
“But pardon, I monologue.”</p>
<p>At once, indicating a gown which an assistant
had brought, she exclaimed again:</p>
<p>“It will ravishingly become madame.”</p>
<p>The gown, a work of the best Parisian art,
suggested something of the immateriality of a
moonbeam, and as the assistant, a girl with
a tired face and circled eyes, held it for inspection,
it gleamed.</p>
<p>Leilah looked at it, wondering the while
where she would wear it, whether indeed she
would wear it at all. Then, before a sheet
that had been placed on the floor and on which
the assistant arranged the gown in a circle
she proceeded to undress.</p>
<p>To the amateur in feminine beauty, there
are few spectacles more attractive than that of
an attractive woman clothed in lingerie and a
hat. This spectacle Leilah presented.</p>
<p>The première exclaimed at it. “Madame la<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_105">[105]</a></span>
comtesse has a figure truly divine. But! But!
Who could have laced her?”</p>
<p>“I was not very well this morning,” Leilah
replied. “I told my women not to make me
too tight. But you can take me in I think
about an inch.”</p>
<p>“Marguerite,” said the première, “draw the
stays a little closer.”</p>
<p>The girl with the tired face undid the corset
and pulled at the strings. But she pulled
awkwardly, perhaps too suddenly.</p>
<p>Leilah gasped, turned, sat down and fell
forward. The première hurried to her. She
had fainted.</p>
<p>“The smelling salts!” the première cried.
“The smelling salts! Cognac! Get some
cognac!”</p>
<p>With one hand she was supporting Leilah,
with the other she gesticulated at Marguerite
who, hurriedly from the mantel, fetched a
vinaigrette which Ernestine then took and
sniffed at.</p>
<p>“She’s coming to,” said the assistant.</p>
<p>Ernestine waved the vinaigrette. “The
gods be praised!”</p>
<p>For Leilah now had opened her eyes.
Wearily she looked about, straightened herself
and sighed.</p>
<p>“I must have fainted.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_106">[106]</a></span></p>
<p>“It is nothing madame,” Ernestine anxiously
protested. “Truly nothing and yet so modish.
Yesterday the Princesse de Solférino fainted.
The day before it was the turn of the young
Duchesse de Malakoff. Such a good augury
for these ladies! Like them madame is perhaps——”</p>
<p>But Leilah now was making an effort to rise.</p>
<p>Abandoning the vinaigrette Ernestine aided
her.</p>
<p>“Madame will perhaps wish the fitting postponed.
Yes, is it not? It might further fatigue
madame. To-morrow—no, to-morrow I
regret but in the afternoon I have three appointments
and in the morning there is the
trousseau of Miss Smith of New York who is
to marry an English lord. Marguerite!” she
interrupted herself to exclaim. “The costume
of madame!”</p>
<p>Then, as the assistant also assisted Leilah,
reflectively the première resumed:</p>
<p>“I hear that every New York young lady
loves a lord. But——”</p>
<p>She hesitated. Visibly the vision evoked,
confused. Yet, after a second’s pause, rallying,
she continued.</p>
<p>“Perhaps it is not every New York young
lady who has a lord to love. Perhaps many
of them love the same lord.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_107">[107]</a></span></p>
<p>Discreetly she smiled. “And that must be so
nice for him!”</p>
<p>Considering Leilah, she concluded:</p>
<p>“But another day——”</p>
<p>Of it all, Leilah heard but that. “Yes,” she
answered, “another day.”</p>
<p>Then, presently, after more attentions, the
première accompanied her to the door.</p>
<p>“Rue François Premier,” Leilah told the
groom.</p>
<p>The machine shot ahead. Arrested shortly
by a congestion of traffic, it halted before a
window behind which Verplank and Silverstairs
sat.</p>
<p>Leilah, unconscious of their presence, gazed
at the murky cinematograph of the street, filled
at this hour with faces sordid, petulant, indifferent,
or frankly gay; with the passing
forms of workmen, idlers, shopgirls, vagabonds;
the swarming Parisian crowd which
did not, she believed, contain one soul as miserable
as her own.</p>
<p>The congestion relieved, the motor shot on.
Leilah leaned back. It was not so long ago
that she was on her way from New York to
Coronado. She was happy then, happy with a
happiness so perfect that it lifted her into the
ultimate ecstasies which love and life comport.
It was not so long ago, only six short months,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_108">[108]</a></span>
only that brief eternity of sorrow which, unended
yet, had been the damning penalty of
that joy.</p>
<p>“In this life ye shall have tribulation,” the
Christ had said, and truly said, and as she
rememorated the significant menace, she wondered
whether for such as she, tribulation
ended here. But her creed assured her. From
the <cite>Vidyâ</cite> she had acquired faith in fate, the
belief rather that we make our own destiny,
that it is by our own hands that our lives are
cast in places pleasant or the reverse, that our
conduct in one life creates the conditions of
our existence in another, that anything experienced
now is the effect of a cause set going in
the past, that happiness is the recompense of
beneficence, deformity the result of cruelty,
melancholy the penalty of evil thoughts. But
whether retribution pursued its victim into
future planes or abandoned them when they
died, depended, she also believed, on how they
faced it here, and it was in this idea that, during
the unended sorrow, she had found the
strength to bear its coils.</p>
<p>The motor stopped. She told the groom to
wait. Presently she was among the subdued
tints and harmonised furnishings of the drawing
room of her friend.</p>
<p>At once, clearly in her limpid voice, considering<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_109">[109]</a></span>
her with brilliant eyes, Violet Silverstairs
aimed and fired.</p>
<p>“You’re a liar!”</p>
<p>At the shot Leilah attempted to smile, and
though she failed, it was not because she fancied
there could be any reproach in the term,
but because latterly she had been unable to
smile at all.</p>
<p>“You’re a liar,” Violet repeated. “Also,
you are late.”</p>
<p>“I know I am late and I am sorry,” Leilah
withdrawing her gloves, replied. “But how
am I a liar?”</p>
<p>“Come to luncheon and you will precious
soon find out. I had some eggs for you, eggs
à l’Aurore Boréale. I had a sweetbread. I
had—I have forgotten what else. Now
I have nothing. Everything is spoiled.”</p>
<p>Violet Silverstairs was perhaps imaginative.
There were eggs, very good eggs too, though
whether prepared in the Aurora Borealis
fashion is perhaps beside the issue. Moreover
there was a sweetbread, one that had been
germinated on salt meadows and which was
not spoiled in the least. In addition there were
the other things which she had forgotten and
all of them appetising in the extreme. It was
an excellent luncheon, perfectly served in a
beautiful room. But it was a luncheon for<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_110">[110]</a></span>
Sybarites, not for the suffering. After the
first morsel Leilah was unable to eat.</p>
<p>“Where is Silverstairs?” she asked when
that morsel had been consumed.</p>
<p>“With your ex.”</p>
<p>Leilah put down her fork. “With Gulian?”</p>
<p>Violet laughed. “Have you more than one?
But it was just through him that your lie
cropped out. Last night he swore by bell,
book and candle that you had never told him
why you cut and ran.”</p>
<p>It was at this juncture that Leilah found
herself unable to eat. Instantly her mind shot
back. She was at Coronado again, in the sunshine
and frippery of her sitting room. She
could see Verplank as he left it, see the letters
that had been brought, see herself as she
opened one of them, that one which with its
enclosures she had redirected and left for him.
The possibility never before conjectured, that
he had not received it girdled her with a
zone of ice. For a moment she looked fixedly
at one of the windows through which the pale
daylight fell. In the beautiful room, companioned
by her nearest friend, she felt that
sense of utter loneliness which in the great
crises of life is experienced by all. Yet was it
true?</p>
<p>“Violet!” she cried. “You are jesting.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_111">[111]</a></span></p>
<p>But the lady, determined then or never to
learn the truth, cocked an eye at her. “I am
not, nor was he.”</p>
<p>At that, Leilah felt the girdle of ice sending
its shivers through her. The plan she had
made must, she saw, be foregone. If Verplank
did not know why she had separated from
him, never would he leave Paris until he did.
But what must he have thought, she agonisedly
reflected, and what must he think!</p>
<p>Violet, who had been watching her, said:</p>
<p>“Why don’t you tell me?”</p>
<p>Leilah taking up her fork again, tried for
countenance sake, to affect to eat. The effort
was beyond her. She put it down.</p>
<p>“I can’t,” she at last replied.</p>
<p>Violet, her brilliant eye still cocked, almost
winked.</p>
<p>“Yes, you said that before. But you see,
don’t you know, that whether you can or cannot
tell me, you will have to tell him and, in
the circumstances, would it not be best to have
me do it for you? To be sure, if you had taken
my advice and omitted to marry Barouffski,
I would say, have it out with him yourself.
But your marriage does not seem to have
simplified matters, which, so far as I can make
out, are now pretty thoroughly mixed.”</p>
<p>The lady spoke better than she knew. Matters<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_112">[112]</a></span>
were complicated though how profoundly
she had no idea, nor was Leilah aware that
the situation, already tortuous, was to become
even more intricately labyrinthine.</p>
<p>“Of course,” Violet, in her bell-like voice,
threw out, “after running away, getting a divorce
and marrying another man, I can fancy
that you don’t much want to see him. But,
really, you owe it to yourself to give the
reason, particularly as it is he who is to blame.”</p>
<p>At this, Leilah, who had been looking down
into her prison, looked up. “I never said so.”</p>
<p>“No, but was it necessary? Even nowadays,
even in the States, a woman does not cut and
run because butter won’t melt in her husband’s
mouth. She does so because she has, or thinks
she has, a grievance and the man, if he is a
man, ought to be given an opportunity to
apologise, however imaginary the grievance
may be.”</p>
<p>Leilah shook her head. “There can be no
apology here.”</p>
<p>Violet laughed. “That is just what I would
say if I had gone and done it. Then it would
be for Silverstairs to try on his knees to get me
to listen to one—provided, of course, that in
the interim I had not taken over another man,
for in that case I verily believe he would
wring my neck. But you need fear nothing of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_113">[113]</a></span>
the sort from Verplank. He seemed anxious
only to wring Barouffski’s.”</p>
<p>Leilah made another futile effort with her
fork. Absently she answered:</p>
<p>“I don’t believe he knew who he was.”</p>
<p>“You don’t! After his telling him! But,
apropos, what became of d’Arcy? I thought
you and he were safely tucked away in a corner,
otherwise never in the world would I
have marched your Number One up to your
Number Two.”</p>
<p>“D’Arcy!” Leilah repeated. She had barely
heard. She scarcely knew what she was
saying, still less what was being said.</p>
<p>“Yes, le beau d’Arcy. Marie de Fresnoy
told me that the other day at the races he
was about to pay a ragamuffin of a girl for a
flower, when she said: ‘I’d rather you kissed
me.’ Fancy that! She told me too that a man
who had a husband’s reasons for wanting to
kill him, was afraid to say a word. It appears
he is a dead shot. But it appears also
that your lovely Barouffski is one of the best
swordsmen here. Verplank had better look
out. To return though to our Chablis Moutonne.
What will you do?”</p>
<p>Leilah, her thoughts afar, made no reply.</p>
<p>“What will you do?” Violet repeated.</p>
<p>From afar the question floated, descended,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_114">[114]</a></span>
trod among the tender places of Leilah’s soul.
At the pain of it she winced. “God help me,
I do not know.”</p>
<p>Violet, cocking an eye again, insinuated:
“Let me take a hand.” She paused, then, for
clincher, threw out: “He dines here to-morrow.”</p>
<p>“Here!” Leilah exclaimed, half rising, fearful
now that at any moment he might appear.
“Here! With you?”</p>
<p>Violet nodded. “Why yes. Why not? If I
can’t confess you, perhaps I can him. At any
rate I can try. You can’t blame me for wanting
to, either. You abandoned him on your
honeymoon. You won’t tell me why and he
says he don’t know. But he must suspect. He
must have concluded that you left him for
this, that or the other. I want to find out what
his this, that and the other are and then make
my own selection. It is true he did say that
it was because of Barouffski. But that’s all
gammon. You never saw Barouffski until you
got here. There is something else and what
that is I want to find out. No, you can’t blame
me. It is the instinct of self-preservation. If
I don’t get at the bottom of it soon, I shall
simply go mad.”</p>
<p>A laugh, clear and musical, wound up
the lady’s chatter. She had no more idea of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_115">[115]</a></span>
going mad than she had of jumping out of the
window. But she wanted to know and that
was only human.</p>
<p>But now, Leilah, who a moment before had
half risen, stood up. “Violet, I am not well,
you must let me go. Yes,” she added as the
lady remarked that on the morrow she might
appear in the rue de la Pompe. “Yes, yes.”</p>
<p>She would have said yes to anything. Hurriedly
she got away.</p>
<p>Without the motor waited.</p>
<p>“Home,” she told the groom.</p>
<p>A little before she had thought herself the
most miserable of beings. But however deep
the hell, there is always a deeper one. Add
uncertainty to distress and the sum of it is
sorrow multiplied by the infinite. That hell,
that sorrow was or seemed to be, hers. She
did not know where to go, what to do, to whom
to turn.</p>
<p>The pitiable plan of flight returned to her.
Again she put it aside. She could not adopt
it now. Besides, though she owed a duty to
herself, she owed another to Verplank. In
what manner he had failed to receive the letter,
it was impossible for her to imagine, but
the fact that he had not received it, hurt her
doubly, hurt her for herself, hurt her for him.
Had it reached him, both would have been<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_116">[116]</a></span>
spared this pass. But it had not reached him
and since then what must he have thought of
her? What!</p>
<p>The query, which kept repeating itself, tortured
her and on that torture was superposed
the precarious problem of his enlightenment.
See him she could not. To write was beyond
her ability. For there are things no pen
should write as there are others no tongue
should tell. None the less the truth she knew
must reach him and would do so best, she
thought, through some channel similar to that
from which the letter had proceeded, from a
source either indifferent or inimical to them
both.</p>
<p>At the auto-suggestion, her thoughts fluttered,
scattered, grouped, then suddenly regrouping,
produced a name. Beneath her
breath she uttered it.</p>
<p>“Barouffski!”</p>
<p>It was not in provision of this that she had
married him. At the time no such possibility
had even impossibly loomed. But she had
married him precisely as she had obtained a
divorce, in order to barricade the future from
the past; in order also for the fleshpots which
she craved—peace and security. She had not
had much of either. None the less, the primary
object which she had sought had, in its<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_117">[117]</a></span>
accomplishment, persisted. He was a barricade.
He was her official and paid protector.</p>
<p>For the task therefore which she could not
perform, he seemed naturally indicated. What
alone gave her pause was the certainty that he
would enjoy it. She could see him, see his
ambiguous smile, see his green eyes aglow,
his cruel and sensual mouth distended.</p>
<p>From the picture she turned. Beyond was
a church, the frontal draped with black. The
motor had stopped. It had reached the house
in the rue de la Pompe and pending the opening
of the doors, whirred as it blocked the sidewalk.</p>
<p>It was then that she turned. Beside her, arrested
by the car, stood Verplank.</p>
<p>After walking up from Voisin’s with Silverstairs
he had left him a moment earlier at
Tempest’s.</p>
<p>But the great doors had opened. Before
Verplank could speak, the machine slid in.
As it entered the court, the doors closed
noisily.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_118">[118]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_119">[119]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="VIII">VIII</a></h2>
<p>On alighting at the perron, Leilah had as
always to endure the ceremonial of two footmen
assiduously assisting her.</p>
<p>“Emmanuel,” she said to one of them. “Is
Monsieur Barouffski at home?”</p>
<p>“No, madame la comtesse.”</p>
<p>Leilah passed on and up. For a moment,
in the hall above, she hesitated. Then, pushing
a portière aside, she entered a salon, went
to the window, and looked out. Crossing the
court was Verplank.</p>
<p>Fear and the fear of it, the throttling sensation
which children know when pursued, enveloped
her. With an idea of telling the servants
that she was out, that she was ill, that
she could see no one, she turned. On a table
near the entrance was a service of Sevrès. Its
tender hues were repeated on the ceiling. Beneath
was the mirror of a waxed and polished
floor. On the glistening wood work her foot
slipped. She staggered, recovered herself, got
to the door.</p>
<p>Already Verplank had entered. She could<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_120">[120]</a></span>
hear him. He was not asking, he was demanding
to see her. The form of the order
mounted violently.</p>
<p>“Tell your mistress that I am here.”</p>
<p>Even then, with the idea that she might still
deny herself, Leilah drew back into the room.
Mentally she was framing a phrase when
Emmanuel entered.</p>
<p>With that air domestics have when tidying
something objectionable, the footman reconstructed
Verplank’s command:</p>
<p>“There is a monsieur who inquires whether
madame la comtesse receives?”</p>
<p>“Tell him——”</p>
<p>But the injunction, as yet not wholly formed,
was never completed. Verplank, brushing the
man aside, strode in.</p>
<p>Leilah, retreating before him, motioned at
Emmanuel, and the servant, with an affronted
air of personal grievance, vacated this room
that was charged now with the vibrations of
hostilities begun.</p>
<p>Retreating yet farther, her eyes on the
foe, Leilah stared at him, and, as she retreated,
Verplank, staring, too, advanced. In
his stare were threats so voluble that she
thought: “He will kill me.” At the thought,
there appeared before her Death’s liberating
face, the mysteriously consoling visage which<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_121">[121]</a></span>
it reveals to those alone who have reached the
depth of human woe.</p>
<p>Beyond, from the church, came the music of
an organ. A requiem was being held. Leilah
felt as though it were her own.</p>
<p>Verplank, his hands clenched, the look of
an executioner about him, threw at her:</p>
<p>“For six months I have been looking for
you. I am come to have you tell me why I
have had to look at all.”</p>
<p>“<i lang="la">Dies irae, dies illa</i>,” admirably, in a clear
contralto, a woman’s voice rang out.</p>
<p>Neither heard it. At the menace of the
man, Leilah shrank, and in an effort at defense
cried pitiably:</p>
<p>“Gulian! I left a letter for you.”</p>
<p>Angrily he tossed his head.</p>
<p>“I received none, nor did I need any to tell
me that there are women on the street, others
in jail, that are less vile than you.”</p>
<p>“<i lang="la">Teste David cum Sibylla</i>,” clearly and
beautifully the voice resumed.</p>
<p>“Gulian!” Leilah cried again.</p>
<p>With whips in his words, he added:</p>
<p>“No harlot could have acted more infamously
than you.”</p>
<p>At the lash of the outrage, Leilah, joining
her hands, held them to him. “Gulian! You
are killing me!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_122">[122]</a></span></p>
<p>“It is what you deserve. There are no
penalties now for such turpitudes as yours.
But, when there were, women like you were
beaten with rods, they were lapidated, stoned
to death, and death was too good for them;
they should have been made to go about, as
they afterward were, as you should be, in a
yellow wig, in a yellow gown, that even
children might point and cry: ‘Shame!’”</p>
<p>The words, which he tore from his mouth,
he hurled at her. She cowered before them.
On a chair near by she had put her bag. Her
wrap had fallen from her. In the church now
the hymn had ceased. The ringing of the
Elevation was beginning.</p>
<p>“Gulian! As if shame had not cried at me!
Gulian, I have been scourged, I have been
stoned. If I live, it is to implore of you
mercy.”</p>
<p>Her hands, still joined, were still extended,
and in her face was an expression of absolute
despair. But this martyr attitude seemed to
him the most abominable of hypocrisies, and
it was with anger refreshed that he lashed her
again.</p>
<p>“Mercy? Yes, you want mercy, you, who
were merciless in your treachery to me. A
sweep would have had more decency, a scullion
more heart. I put in your hands my trust,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_123">[123]</a></span>
my love, my honour, and you who want
mercy dragged them in dirt.”</p>
<p>“Gulian!” Within her now was that invincible
need of justice which impels the weakest
to protest against the savagery of wrong.
“Gulian! When you know!”</p>
<p>“I do know. I know you and your lies, and
the infamy of them too well. At Coronado——”</p>
<p>“Gulian! You are not killing me merely,
you torture my very soul.”</p>
<p>He sneered.</p>
<p>“Do I? Do I, indeed! No, you compliment
yourself. It is what I want to do, but
you cheat me even there. No woman with a
soul could have done this soulless thing.”</p>
<p>The brutality of the arraignment shook her.
She leaned against the chair for support. She
felt hopeless, helpless, defenseless, and it was
because the need for justice still impelled her,
that she protested anew.</p>
<p>“Gulian, if only you knew! If only you
had had that letter! Had it reached you, you
would know that there was no deceit, that I
left you for your sake as well as my own. Gulian,
if I had not gone you would have seen and
made me tell you, and then it may be you
would have taken me and thrown me with you
from the yacht.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_124">[124]</a></span></p>
<p>There were tears in her words. With one
hand she held to the chair, the other she raised
to her head. It pained her. She felt bruised
and looked it.</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“<i lang="la">Ecce panis Angelorum</i><br/></span>
<span class="i1"><i lang="la">Factus cibus viatorum——</i>”<br/></span>
</div></div>
<p>Beyond, sustained by the arpeggios of the
organ, the voice of a singer mounted sheerly
like a thread of gold. It lowered and heightened.
Presently, on a note, as if abruptly
snapped, it ceased. The organ continued. It
renewed the canticle. It projected a scale that
ascended slowly, as though upward and onward,
over the limitless steps of eternity, it
were lifting the soul of the dead.</p>
<p>Leilah wished it were her own. Sadly she
added:</p>
<p>“God knows it would have been better.
Anything would be better than that you should
speak to me as you do.”</p>
<p>There is an innocence that appeals, a sincerity
that disarms, a candour that outfaces every
proof, and Verplank, who had been bent on
overwhelming this woman with a contempt
which he felt wholly deserved, was impressed,
in spite of himself, by the evident ingenuousness,
by the evident wretchedness, too, of her
words.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_125">[125]</a></span></p>
<p>He moved back.</p>
<p>“You say I would have made you tell me?”</p>
<p>“Yes. Yes. You would have.”</p>
<p>“But made you tell me what?”</p>
<p>Leilah, still holding one hand to her head,
raised the other from the chair, and with it
made a gesture slight, yet desolate.</p>
<p>“What was it?” he asked.</p>
<p>Before replying, she looked away.</p>
<p>“What I hid from you rather than repeat.”</p>
<p>“But repeat what?”</p>
<p>Her face still turned from him, she answered:</p>
<p>“Something, my—something Mr. Ogston
sent me.”</p>
<p>“Mr. Ogston!” Verplank exclaimed. The
formality of the statement astounded him.
“Do you mean your father? What did he
send you?”</p>
<p>But Leilah would not or could not speak.
Her mouth contracted as though she were
choking, and she put a hand to her throat.</p>
<p>“Tell me,” he insisted.</p>
<p>She turned, and beseechingly she looked at
him.</p>
<p>“Gulian, I cannot.”</p>
<p>At that Verplank moved nearer, and so
dominatingly that again she extended her
hands.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_126">[126]</a></span></p>
<p>“Gulian, I will get some one else to tell
you. I had intended to. Believe me, it is better
so.”</p>
<p>“It concerns me?”</p>
<p>“Yes, you.”</p>
<p>“And you?”</p>
<p>“Yes, both of us.”</p>
<p>“Then you shall tell me, and tell me now.
Do you hear?”</p>
<p>“Gulian!” she cried. She raised her clasped
hands to him. “Gulian!”</p>
<p>But Verplank, his jaw ominously square,
confronted her.</p>
<p>“I say you shall.”</p>
<p>“Don’t look at me then,” she pleaded.
“Bend your head, bend it lower. One second,
then I will. One second—one. Ah, God!
I cannot.”</p>
<p>Verplank, who at her bidding had stooped,
straightened himself, and caught at her.</p>
<p>“I say you shall.”</p>
<p>“Gulian, a moment. Give me a moment.
Now bend your head again. One moment,
Gulian; your father, your father—— My
mother loved him.”</p>
<p>“Your mother loved my father!”</p>
<p>“Gulian, I am his daughter.”</p>
<p>“You are what?”</p>
<p>“I am your sister.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_127">[127]</a></span></p>
<p>As she whispered it, she covered her face.
Verplank started, straightened again, raised
his arm, and, with a gesture wide, elemental,
absurd, and human, struck at the empty air.</p>
<p>Savagely he turned to her.</p>
<p>“And you believe this?”</p>
<p>Leilah, her head bowed, her face covered,
shook with sobs.</p>
<p>“You believe it?” he repeated.</p>
<p>“There were letters,” she stammered.
“Three letters. No one could read them and
not—and not——”</p>
<p>“And it was for this you left me?”</p>
<p>A fresh access seized her. He could not see
her tears, he heard them.</p>
<p>“And it was for this you got a divorce?”</p>
<p>On the chair beside her was her bag. She
felt in it, and got out a handkerchief.</p>
<p>“And it was for this you took that cad?”</p>
<p>Slowly, with infinite hesitations, the bit of
cambric held to a face that was wet and white,
she turned to him.</p>
<p>“I thought you would forget. I thought
you would marry. I thought you would be
happy. I hoped so that you would. But my
leaving you, the divorce, the marriage, these
things were done with no idea of happiness.
They were to serve as barriers between us.”</p>
<p>Impotently he stamped a foot. He was furious<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_128">[128]</a></span>
still. But his anger had deflected. He
was enraged less at her than at circumstances.</p>
<p>“Rubbish! That’s what your barriers are.”</p>
<p>Leilah, wiping her eyes, turned from him.
The barriers, however fragile, were not rubbish
to her.</p>
<p>Violently he continued:</p>
<p>“As for Barouffski——”</p>
<p>But Leilah, turning to him again, interrupted:</p>
<p>“Gulian, let me tell you. Last night I
planned to have some one ask you, for my
sake, to go away. Gulian, I thought you
would, but I determined if you would not
that I would go.”</p>
<p>Verplank moved back.</p>
<p>“Go! Go where?”</p>
<p>“Ah! God knows! Anywhere. Wherever
I could hide myself. Wherever I could hide
my love for you.”</p>
<p>Her eyes had been raised to his. At the
confession they lowered of themselves. Then
again she looked him in the face.</p>
<p>“Gulian, it is that which cried shame at me.
It is that which scourged me with rods bitterer
than those of which you spoke. You say the
barriers are nothing. Gulian, you are wrong.
To me they are eternal.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” he angrily retorted. “Yes, if your<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_129">[129]</a></span>
story were true. But it isn’t. It’s arrant nonsense.”</p>
<p>In miserable protest, she half raised a hand.</p>
<p>“Gulian, when I read those letters my youth
died in me. Never since they reached me
have I had the heart to smile. If you had
seen them you would have felt the truth
in every line.”</p>
<p>“I would have felt nothing of the kind; the
fact that you still care for me ought to show
you that they are false.”</p>
<p>“Gulian, I tried to think that, too; but even
in trying I felt that I was pleading for myself.”</p>
<p>“Then, for the love of God, stop pleading
and act! Look at yourself, look at me! We
could not be more unlike if we came from
different planets.”</p>
<p>She was making an effort to answer. He
stopped her.</p>
<p>“Listen to this. If you can’t act, I shall.
My mother is in London. To-morrow she is
to be here. Probably she can tell me the truth.
If not, I will go to the States. There I will
see your father. When I return it will be with
proofs. I will bring them if I have to drag
that old scoundrel with me.”</p>
<p>He paused. Though angry still, her story
had pacified him. He felt it to be false, nonetheless<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_130">[130]</a></span>
she had believed it and the fact that
she had, absolved her of much that she had
done. However she had erred, she had at
least tried to do right. He closed and opened
a hand, looked at it and from it looked at
her.</p>
<p>“But first I will see my mother. In any
case I will be here to-morrow. Yes, that’s
what I’ll do. Why shouldn’t I come. Why
not?”</p>
<p>Leilah did not answer. She did not believe
he would come, except to cause fresh
agony to them both there was no reason why
he should do so. The horror which she had
told him and to which incredulously he had
listened was gospel to her, an evil gospel, yes,
but nonetheless a true one. Besides if he did
come as, in any case, he said he would, he
might meet Barouffski, and affrightedly she
foresaw blows, afterwards a duel—one which
she was unaware was then impending.</p>
<p>“Why not?” Verplank repeated, fumbling
her as he spoke with suspicious eyes and appearing
to divine and to resent her forecast.</p>
<p>She caught at a straw. Usually, between
four and seven, Barouffski was tabled at baccarat,
gambling with her money. That straw
she produced.</p>
<p>“Come at five.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_131">[131]</a></span></p>
<p>Verplank, appeased, nodded. “Very good,
at five then.”</p>
<p>But at once she realised that other safeguards
were needful. She hesitated, looked
about her, looked at Verplank, gave him his
hat, motioned to him. Then, preceding him,
she passed into an adjoining salon, entered
the dining room and moved from it to the
garden below.</p>
<p>Passably mystified, he followed.</p>
<p>The air, freighted with fragrance, stirred by
music from the church, the dogs, at sight of
him, charged suddenly with menaces. Straining
at their chains, viciously they clamoured.</p>
<p>Indifferently Verplank glanced from them
to the gate beyond, to which Leilah was leading
him.</p>
<p>When both reached it, she opened it and
said: “Come this way to-morrow, will you?”</p>
<p>For a second he considered her. Her face
was as a book in which he could read the reason.
In view of many things, particularly of
the duel, it seemed to him all very puerile.</p>
<p>But, replacing his hat, grimly he nodded.
“Before then I have rather an idea that there
may be a deficit among us.”</p>
<p>This expression, in itself perhaps over precise,
was too much for her and the fact that
it was showed itself in her eyes.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_132">[132]</a></span></p>
<p>Without heeding their inquiry he nodded
again. “I will come this way but only that
together we may leave by the other.”</p>
<p>Again he nodded. In a moment he had
gone.</p>
<p>Leilah, closing the gate behind him watched
him go. It was, she felt, her last earthly sight
of him. There would be no going away together.
He would never come back. Never.
His mother, if she knew the truth, could only
substantiate it. If she did not, another would.
Helplessly she held at the gate. A vagrant
passed, she did not see. A hawker called, she
did not hear. She was not only helpless, she
was hopeless. She wished that death really
were, that it could beneficently come, take her,
shroud her in blankness, in endless oblivion of
what was and of what might have been. Long
since the dogs, mollified by Verplank’s exit,
had ceased to bark. Shrilly now from the
church came boys’ fresh voices. The music of
them stirred her a little and she turned.</p>
<p>Before her, framed in a window of the dining
room, Barouffski stood. At sight of him
she started. Amiably he smiled. When she
looked again he had vanished.</p>
<p>But, in a moment, in the doorway beneath,
smiling still, he reappeared.</p>
<p>“What a beautiful day, is it not?” Oilily<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_133">[133]</a></span>
he rubbed his hands. “You have been having
visitors, cara mia?”</p>
<p>As he spoke he moved toward her. Urbanely
he continued! “And what did they have to
say?”</p>
<p>He was quite near her now and, with his
head held a trifle to one side he was regarding
her with affectionate indulgence, much as one
would regard a child.</p>
<p>“They told you nothing new, cara mia?”</p>
<p>Without looking at him, Leilah shook her
head. “Nothing. Nothing at least that I
did not know.”</p>
<p>Smiling still, indulgent as before, Barouffski
plucked at his pointed beard. “And what
is that, cara mia?”</p>
<p>Remotely, in a voice without colour, as
though speaking not to him at all but only to
herself, she answered:</p>
<p>“That I am the most miserable woman in
the world.”</p>
<p>Barouffski’s smile broadened. “Bah! They
exaggerated, cara mia. It is the way of the
world. Mon Dieu, à qui se fier? You are
not at all what they said. You are—how shall
I put it—perhaps a bit indiscreet. That is it,
a bit indiscreet.” He pointed to the bench.
“Will you not seat yourself?”</p>
<p>He was still smiling, but the smile wholly<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_134">[134]</a></span>
muscular, was one in which the eyes have no
part. The “visitors” whom he affected to
ridicule, alarmed him. They were, he knew,
quite capable of taking Leilah away. Her
presence or absence was quite one to him. Only
if she departed, so would her purse.</p>
<p>“Will you not?” he repeated.</p>
<p>“I am going in.”</p>
<p>“Certainly, cara mia. It is as it pleases you.
But——”</p>
<p>At this Leilah, who had passed him, turned.</p>
<p>“Well, what?”</p>
<p>“You see, cara mia, supposing I had visitors.
Supposing rather I had a visitor. We are only
supposing, are we not? Bon! Supposing this
visitor happened to be what we call an ancienne,
an old flame, an inamorata of mine.
Supposing that were so. Do you know what
you could do?”</p>
<p>“No,” Leilah from over her shoulder answered.
“Nor do I care.”</p>
<p>“Forgive me, cara mia. You mean that you
do not care to be informed. Yet you should
know, for you could if you wished have me
fined. Yes, that is what you could do. You
could have me fined.</p>
<p>“But I,” he resumed. “Do you know in
similar circumstances what I could do? Do
you know rather what the law says I may do?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_135">[135]</a></span>
Do you, cara mia? Do you? For really you
ought to.”</p>
<p>But Leilah now was approaching the entrance.</p>
<p>“What!” Barouffski exclaimed. “You are
not interested? You are really going?”</p>
<p>As he spoke, he bowed. “Bon, à ce soir, cara
mia. And a last word. If I may advise, do
not be led into indiscretions.”</p>
<p>“Do not,” he repeated, while shrilly from
the adjacent church came the voices of boys
chanting the final phrase of the Pater Noster:</p>
<p>“<i lang="la">Sed libera nos a malo.</i>”</p>
<p>“That is it,” he called at Leilah’s retreating
back. “Pray rather to be delivered of them.
Otherwise——”</p>
<p>But Leilah now had entered the house.</p>
<p>“Otherwise,” he continued to himself and
moving to the kennels, patted the dogs, “otherwise
a sojourn in Poland may improve you.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_136">[136]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_137">[137]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="IX">IX</a></h2>
<p>“The strawberries were delicious,” Violet,
the following day, remarked to Leilah.</p>
<p>The two women were seated in the garden of
the house in the rue de la Pompe. It was just
after luncheon and between them was a table
on which coffee had been served. From without
came the whirr of passing motors, the cries
of those hawkers who are never still. But the
garden itself was quiet, scented too and the
day superb.</p>
<p>Violet, patting a yawn, resumed: “One
never really gets strawberries except in Paris.
They are so big! And so expensive, aren’t
they? I know that in a restaurant a man gave
one to the waiter for a tip.”</p>
<p>She looked about her. “But, mercy! What
can have become of Aurelia? She was to have
stopped for me.”</p>
<p>“Don’t you think it unwise to let her go on
the stage?” Leilah, with an air of talking for
talk’s sake, inquired.</p>
<p>“Let her! But she’s got her head. I can’t
prevent her. She’ll never come to any harm
though. She isn’t the kind to want to do anything<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_138">[138]</a></span>
she thought was wrong. No indeed.
She would never think anything wrong that
she wanted to do. But tell me. I could not
very well ask before the servants. What are
you going to do?”</p>
<p>For a moment Leilah did not answer. Then,
a bit resignedly, she folded her hands.</p>
<p>“I do not see that I have the ability to do
anything.”</p>
<p>The pause, the gesture, the reply, angered
Violet. She bristled.</p>
<p>“Don’t be so modest, you make me nervous!”</p>
<p>For a moment she also paused. Then, ruminantly,
as though in self communion, the lady
uttered these cryptic words:</p>
<p>“But perhaps——”</p>
<p>Leilah, who had turned away, turned to her.
“Perhaps what?”</p>
<p>But Violet, compressing her lips, assumed
the appearance which a very worldly, exquisitely
gowned and beautiful Sphinx might present.</p>
<p>“Perhaps what?” Leilah, puzzled by the attitude,
repeated.</p>
<p>“Oh, nothing. That is, nothing in particular.
I was merely thinking from battle, murder
and sudden death, Good Lord deliver us!
And yet——”</p>
<p>“Well?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_139">[139]</a></span></p>
<p>Violet looked her over. “I know I ought
not to tell and for that very reason I will.
Your two husbands are to fight to-day. They
may be at it now——”</p>
<p>Abruptly she made a face, dropped her
voice and threw out:</p>
<p>“No such luck.”</p>
<p>In the doorway Barouffski stood.</p>
<p>Leilah had not seen. Inwardly she had
shrivelled. To the sudden knowledge that the
two men were to fight, fear, as suddenly, superposed
the conviction that Verplank would
be killed. It stirred in her a wholly animal
longing to get away from herself; to be rid,
however transiently, of that sense of horror
and helplessness which only the tortured
know. In an effort to shut out the pain of it,
she closed her eyes.</p>
<p>When she opened them, Barouffski was
before her. Affably he was addressing her
friend.</p>
<p>“Beautiful day, Lady Silverstairs. In London
you do not often have such weather. I
hope Lord Silverstairs is planning to keep
you here a very long time.”</p>
<p>“What? What?” Violet in a crescendo of
surprise, exclaimed.</p>
<p>Affably, smilingly, unperturbedly, Barouffski
reiterated the expression of his hope.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_140">[140]</a></span></p>
<p>Icily Violet cut him short. “With us it is
the woman who makes and unmakes plans.”</p>
<p>Barouffski, unabashed and smiling, plucked
at his beard. “A most excellent custom. Yes.
For when has reason governed the world? It
is only by the heartstrings that men can be led
and women alone can lead them.”</p>
<p>But now Violet with the air of an empress
had risen. “Leilah, my motor is at the door.
Let me take you for a turn in the Bois.”</p>
<p>“Do,” Barouffski exclaimed, looking as he
spoke at Leilah. “You are a trifle pale, cara
mia. A turn or two now in the Bois——”</p>
<p>With a gesture he signified, that is what
you need.</p>
<p>Turning to Violet he added: “So thoughtful
of you, Lady Silverstairs.”</p>
<p>In speaking he bowed for Violet now was
vacating the garden and Leilah who had risen
was following her.</p>
<p>Barouffski bowed again. “Cara mia, a
pleasant drive to you.”</p>
<p>But, when both women had entered the
house, he sighed, sighed with relief, looked
about him, consulted his watch, looked again
about him, moved to the entrance, touched a
bell which presently a footman answered.</p>
<p>Barouffski indicated the table and chairs.
“Get all that out of here.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_141">[141]</a></span></p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le comte,” the man,
with marked deference, answered and started
to do as bidden.</p>
<p>Barouffski checked him. “In five or ten
minutes some gentlemen will come by the
main entrance. Show them in the reception
room. About the same time others will come
by the gate. When they do, see that I am notified
at once.”</p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le comte.”</p>
<p>“Afterward, when they are gone, come back
here and tidy up.”</p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le comte.”</p>
<p>But now Barouffski had turned, he was entering
the house. The man stuck his tongue
out at him. “Canaille, va!” he muttered.
Raising his arms, he added: “Tidy up, eh?
Tidy up what? The remains of your conversation,
no doubt. Bah! That won’t be
much.” He laughed, took first the table, then
the chairs, vanished with them and reappeared.</p>
<p>A bell at the gate had sounded, he hurried
there and bowing, admitted Aurelia and that
young person’s young man.</p>
<p>The girl made straight for the kennels.
“Parsnips!” she delightedly exclaimed.
“Aren’t those two big brutes simply dear?”</p>
<p>Swiftly Emmanuel intervened. “Pardon,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_142">[142]</a></span>
they are very savage.” Then, as the girl hesitated
he added: “Will mademoiselle give
herself the trouble to pass into the salon?”</p>
<p>Aurelia tossed her pretty head. “No, I like
it here. Besides I hate suggestions. Tell
Madame Barouffska that I have come on a
most unimportant matter which will probably
detain me a very long time.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” her companion rejoined as the footman
retreated. “Yes, I often think that it is
only unimportant matters that are really momentous.”
In his hand was a stick which negligently
he twirled. “What is this one, if I
may ask?”</p>
<p>“I have forgotten.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps then it was really important.”</p>
<p>Aurelia, who, with her delicious face and
delicate garments, looked like a wayward angel,
lifted a finger.</p>
<p>“So it was! So it was! I remember now I
wanted to ask her how she likes matrimony.”</p>
<p>“Cæsar!” the youth exclaimed. “You are
not collecting data on the subject, are you?”</p>
<p>Meekly, with a treacherously innocent air,
the girl surveyed him. “You wouldn’t wish
me to take leaps in the dark, would you?”</p>
<p>“Certainly I would. Certainly I do—since
you are to take them with me.”</p>
<p>With the same wicked look, Aurelia moistened<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_143">[143]</a></span>
her lips. “What a beautiful nature you
have!”</p>
<p>Pleased at this, the little lord nodded.</p>
<p>“I’ll tell you what matrimony is, two souls
with but a single thought——”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Aurelia interrupted. “Two souls
with half a thought apiece.” Rapturously she
sighed. “There is real bliss!”</p>
<p>Buttercups snarled. “Oh come, now! If
you turn everything into ridicule——”</p>
<p>Dreamily Aurelia continued. “I asked the
duchess, and she said——”</p>
<p>“The old harridan!”</p>
<p>“You know her manner”—a manner
which Aurelia instantly made her own. “My
dear, matrimony is three months of adoration,
three months of introspection, thirty years of
toleration—with the children to begin it all
over.”</p>
<p>Buttercups frowned. “A rather voluminous
definition.”</p>
<p>“Rather luminous, I should call it.”</p>
<p>Frowning still, Buttercups threw out.</p>
<p>“While you were at it, it’s a pity you did not
ask her what love is.”</p>
<p>But the sarcasm, if sarcasm it were, convulsed
Aurelia. “Parsnips!” she delightedly
exclaimed. “You’ll never believe it! She
asked me!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_144">[144]</a></span></p>
<p>“Mistook you for an expert,” Buttercups,
glowering at the beautiful, laughing girl
snapped back. “What did you say?”</p>
<p>Aurelia, her eyes sparkling, her little white
teeth visible, her little pink tongue also, looked
about her, turned, went to the bench, got up
on it and there, solemnly now as though on a
platform, coughed.</p>
<p>“I said, that while from studies and statistics
I was inclined to believe that, theoretically,
love is a fermentation of the molecules
of the imagination, actually it is the
affection of somebody else.”</p>
<p>Blankly Buttercups stared. “I don’t understand
that.”</p>
<p>Aurelia coughed again. “I added that
from the same studies and statistics I was also
inclined to believe that love is the tragedy of
those who lack it, the boredom of those who
don’t.”</p>
<p>“Eh?” Buttercups whined. “I don’t understand
that either.”</p>
<p>“I further stated that love is a specific emotion,
more or less exclusive in selection, more—or
less—permanent in duration and due to
a mental disturbance, in itself caused by a
law of attraction which somebody or other
said was the myth of happiness, invented by
the devil for man’s despair.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_145">[145]</a></span></p>
<p>Helplessly Buttercups groaned. “I don’t
understand that at all.”</p>
<p>With birdlike ease Aurelia hopped from
the bench and with consoling delicacy nodded:</p>
<p>“Violet said she didn’t either.”</p>
<p>Buttercups brightened. “Now there’s a
woman of sense.”</p>
<p>Very sweetly Aurelia nodded again. “Leilah
Barouffska said she did understand, so I
may suppose that she is stupid.”</p>
<p>At the shot—which missed him—Buttercups
tormented the tip of his nose.</p>
<p>“No doubt, she does seem to have made a
mess of things. Why now did she leave her
first husband?”</p>
<p>Aurelia looked down and away.</p>
<p>“It is not a thing I could mention.”</p>
<p>Buttercups gave a little jump. “What?”</p>
<p>Perversely, her lovely eyes still lowered,
Aurelia added:</p>
<p>“She caught him in the act.”</p>
<p>Buttercups jumped again.</p>
<p>Aurelia blushed or rather appeared to do
so. “With her own eyes she saw him eating
fish with his knife.”</p>
<p>But Buttercups had rallied. “Now, Aurelia,”
he protested, “I have heard too many lies
about myself, too many confounded lies, to
believe any such story.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_146">[146]</a></span></p>
<p>Superciliously, her delicate nose in the
air, Aurelia looked him over. “Ah, indeed!
But then you see sensible people
never object to the lies that are told about
them. What we do object to is the truth.
Now when we are married—if we ever
are——”</p>
<p>“Aurelia,” the poor devil pathetically interrupted,
“you never say when we are married
without adding if we ever are!”</p>
<p>“That’s to teach you not to take things for
granted. I have been engaged before—and
may be again.”</p>
<p>“B-before!” the flustered Buttercups stuttered.
“A-again!”</p>
<p>Frostily this ingénue considered the youth.
“Parsnips, don’t look at me in that fashion,
you inflame me.”</p>
<p>She cocked an ear. “What’s that?”</p>
<p>At the gate the bell was ringing and unperceived
by either Emmanuel had reappeared.
The footman was descending the garden.
Midway he stopped.</p>
<p>“I have the honour to inform mademoiselle
that madame la comtesse is momentarily
awaited.”</p>
<p>He bowed, moved on, opened the gate
through which then a brief procession passed:—Silverstairs,
a green bag under his arm; de<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_147">[147]</a></span>
Fresnoy, a stick under his; an old man with
a small valise; finally Verplank.</p>
<p>Verplank, raising his hat, approached Aurelia.
De Fresnoy, after saluting the young
woman, addressed the old man.</p>
<p>But Silverstairs, sidling up to Buttercups
and indicating Aurelia, whispered:</p>
<p>“Get her away, there’s to be a fight.”</p>
<p>“The deuce there is!” Buttercups exclaimed.</p>
<p>For a moment he looked helplessly about
and made a little futile gesture. “If I ask
her to go she’ll stay.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs pulled at his moustache. “Then
tell her to stay and she’ll go.”</p>
<p>But such strategy was needless. Aurelia
had no intention of loitering among these men,
not one of whom interested her remotely.
With a glimpse of her pretty teeth to Verplank
and a nod at the others, she passed, followed
by Buttercups, through the gate which
the footman held open.</p>
<p>Meanwhile the dogs were barking and,
from the house beyond, Barouffski appeared.
With him were friends of his, Palencia, Tyszkiewicz;
also a young man with a serious face
who, like the old man, had with him a case
which gingerly he put on the ground.</p>
<p>Verplank glanced at them, went to the
bench and began removing his coat.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_148">[148]</a></span></p>
<p>The night before he had dreamed pleasurably,
as the great beasts of the jungles dream,
of blood and the joy of killing. He had
dreamed also and less agreeably that Leilah’s
story was true. However he had denied it, he
did not know but that it might be. Nonetheless
he doubted. He doubted it for the most
human of reasons, because he wanted to. He
doubted it for another and a better reason,
because his intuitions so prompted. He had
yet another reason, one less valid perhaps but
cogent, the dissimilarity between Leilah and
himself. The contrast was so marked that they
might have come of alien races, from different
zones.</p>
<p>On leaving her house other differences
had occurred to him, differences not physical
but moral. It is ridiculous, he had told himself.
Nonetheless he dreamed that the story
was true.</p>
<p>Meanwhile the parliamentaries had not been
entirely successful. The note dispatched from
Voisins had resulted that evening in a conference
between Verplank’s seconds and Barouffski’s.
These latter, Tyszkiewicz and Palencia,
had begun by insisting that it was their
principal who was aggrieved, that Verplank,
in attempting to address a lady whom he knew
did not wish to speak to him, had been wholly<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_149">[149]</a></span>
at fault and was deprived in consequence of
the choice of weapons.</p>
<p>To this de Fresnoy had objected that Verplank
knew nothing of the kind, that in addressing
or in attempting to address the lady,
he had acted in accordance with the usages
of the world: moreover assuming him to have
been in error in thinking that the lady did not
object to being addressed, her slightest indication
to the contrary would have been super-sufficient
to make him desist, the result being
that Barouffski’s intervention reflected on
his good-breeding and was therefore an
insult.</p>
<p>This view of the matter Barouffski’s seconds
refused to accept. They represented that
it were difficult for the lady to have more
punctiliously informed Verplank of her disinclination
to be addressed by him than she
had already done in obtaining a divorce.</p>
<p>At the easy logic de Fresnoy laughed. According
to him, all that was beside the issue.
He declared that many divorced couples were
better friends afterward than they had found
it possible to be before. In support of the
statement he cited history: he cited the case of
Henri IV and the Reine Margot. He did
more than cite, he quoted the chronicles of
Pierre l’Estoile, and he insisted that if his view<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_150">[150]</a></span>
were not accepted the conference must dissolve
and an arbiter be convened.</p>
<p>In face of these arguments advanced to provincials
by a Parisian, advanced too with that
tone of authority which only a man sure of his
ground or of his assurance may maintain and
advanced, moreover, to men not over sure of
their own, the latter hesitated.</p>
<p>Then, as though to demonstrate the truth of
the paradox of which de Fresnoy had delivered
himself at Voisins, the quip that a man
is rarely killed except by his seconds, Silverstairs
who, thus far throughout the conference,
had smoked in placid silence, suddenly stuck
his oar in.</p>
<p>“Why not toss for it?”</p>
<p>Tyszkiewicz and Palencia, hesitating still,
agreed. A coin was flipped, heads for Verplank,
tails for Barouffski. Tails it was. Barouffski
was accorded the choice of arms, foils
were designated by his seconds and the meeting
was arranged to be held in his garden, at two
the next day.</p>
<p>Verplank would have preferred pistols.
But, informed of the result, he dreamed pleasurably.
The encounter was the main thing.
Presently sleep sank him deeper. Life and
death ceased to be. He became part of the inchoate
and primordial. Then, from the voids<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_151">[151]</a></span>
in which he lay, lightly, delicately, imperceptibly,
an artery reached and drew him. But
his scattered selves, the objective, subjective,
superjective, satisfied with their temporary decentralisation,
resisted. In the subtle struggle
a memory, catalogued Leilah, was aroused.
The syllables of the name resounded remotely,
like a damp drum beaten obscurely behind the
shelves of thought. They conveyed no meaning
and, before they could suggest any, they
passed, drifted by the currents of unconsciousness.
But at once, those currents, barred by
assembling ideas, broke to the murmur of the
vocables—Leilah! Leilah! Other memories,
incidents, possibilities eddied among them and
the sleeper, awakening, found himself confronted
by the tragic mystery which the name
revived.</p>
<p>Immediately the picture that had formed itself
before him at Voisins returned. From it
the Why had gone but the obstacle remained,
and, as he got from the bed, he promised himself
to demolish it.</p>
<p>Now, in the hostile enclosure, as the dogs
barked and Barouffski appeared, Verplank removed
his coat, undid his collar, rolled up his
sleeves.</p>
<p>Beside him, bending over a case, the old
man mumbled. He was a surgeon. The hour<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_152">[152]</a></span>
was not to his liking. He believed in duels,
they were a source of revenue to him, but he
believed in fighting on an empty stomach and,
in the afternoon, who had that?</p>
<p>He looked up at Verplank. “Monsieur, you
are young, you are brave, I doubt not you are
also adroit. But had I been you, when your
seconds asked, as I may suppose they asked:
‘Which shall it be, the pistol at twenty paces
or the sword?’ I would have said to them:
‘Give me the sword at twenty paces.’ Yes;
that is what I would have said.”</p>
<p>Verplank ignored him utterly. In the center
of the garden the seconds grouped together,
were concluding details. Beyond, near
the house, Barouffski stood. He also was now
bare-armed. Near him, emptying a case, was
the young man with the serious face. Beside
him, placed upright against a wall, were two
long green bags. From the street came the
usual rumble, the noise of motors, the cries of
hawkers, the snorting of stallions, the clatter
of hoofs.</p>
<p>Silverstairs, abandoning the others went
over to Verplank.</p>
<p>“De Fresnoy has been chosen director.”</p>
<p>Verplank, from his trowsers pocket, had
taken a pair of gloves. The palm of one of
them, previously moistened, had been dusted<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_153">[153]</a></span>
with rosin. Now, as he put it on, he looked
across at Barouffski who was looking at him.
The man’s bare arms were hairy and the sight
of them was repugnant to Verplank. At once
all the jealousy, all the hate of the male,
mounted like wine to his head. He coloured,
his hand shook. Then, resolutely, he reacted.
In a moment he had again control of himself
and it was idly, with an air of indifference,
as he finished with his glove, that, in reference
to the dinner that evening, he said:</p>
<p>“Are you to have many people to-night?”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, delighted that Verplank, showing
up in such form, should be so sure of the
result, laughed. “No, it is to be small and
early. Afterward we go on to a play. The
missis has a box for something, the Gymnase
I think.”</p>
<p>Verplank bent over and turned up the ends
of his trowsers. A moment before he had been
considering methods of attack, in particular
a direct riposte after a certain parade and it
was springingly, as though delivering it, that
he straightened.</p>
<p>But now de Fresnoy approached. Silverstairs
moved to one side where he was joined by
Tyszkiewicz, a thin, tall man with a prominent
nose and an air vaguely pedagogic, and
by Palencia who, with great black eyebrows<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_154">[154]</a></span>
that met and a full black beard, looked like
Fra Diavolo disguised as a clubman.</p>
<p>From one of the long green bags de Fresnoy
had taken a pair of foils. These he offered,
hilt foremost, to Verplank who grasped
one and then to gauge its temper, or his own,
lashed the air with it. The movement revealed
a suppleness of arm, a muscular ease, the
swelling biceps which training alone provides.</p>
<p>Save Barouffski, no one noticed. For a moment
his eyes shifted absently. It was as
though he too had meditated a coup and now
was meditating another. Meanwhile he also
had received a foil.</p>
<p>“Messieurs!” de Fresnoy called. He spoke
in a loud, clear voice. He had moved back and
stood at an angle to Barouffski and Verplank.
Opposite, at an equal angle were the seconds
and surgeons. All now were so stationed that
they formed a sort of cross.</p>
<p>“Messieurs, I do not need to remind you
of the common loyalty to be observed. What
I have to say is that the encounter will proceed
in engagements of three minutes, followed
each by three minutes of repose, until one of
you is incapacitated.”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy looked from Barouffski to
Verplank. At once in his loud, clear voice he
called:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_155">[155]</a></span></p>
<p>“On guard!”</p>
<p>The two men fell into position. De Fresnoy
moved forward, took in either hand the
foils at the points, drew them together until
they met, left them so and moved back.</p>
<p>“Allez, messieurs!”</p>
<p>At the word Allez, or, in English, go, and
without waiting for the term Messieurs that
followed, instantly Barouffski lunged. His foil
pierced Verplank in the cheek and touched the
upper jaw.</p>
<p>Verplank had a vision of a footman peering
from a window, a taste of something hot and
acrid in his mouth, a sense of pain, the sensation
of vulperine fury.</p>
<p>De Fresnoy’s face had grown red as his
neckcloth. He brandished his stick.</p>
<p>“Monsieur!” he cried at Barouffski. “Your
conduct is odious. You shall answer to me
for it.”</p>
<p>Barouffski bowed. “For the expression
which it has pleased you to employ, you shall
answer to me.”</p>
<p>“Permit me! Permit me!” Tyszkiewicz interjected.
“To what do you object?”</p>
<p>Angrily de Fresnoy turned at him. “Your
principal drew before the order. He——”</p>
<p>“Permit me! Permit me!” Tyszkiewicz interrupted.
“The word Allez is an order. The<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_156">[156]</a></span>
moment it is uttered hostilities begin. The
term Messieurs is but a polite accessory, a
term which may or may not be employed.”</p>
<p>Insolently de Fresnoy considered him. “I
have no lessons to receive from you.”</p>
<p>“Permit me! Permit me——”</p>
<p>But de Fresnoy had turned on his heel. Before
him Verplank stood, Silverstairs on one
side, the old surgeon on the other. The young
surgeon had joined them. Beyond, Barouffski
was examining the point of his foil.</p>
<p>From Verplank’s mouth and face blood was
running. The wound had not improved his
appearance. The old surgeon, on tiptoes, was
staunching it.</p>
<p>“What I like,” he confided, speaking the
while very unctuously as though what he was
saying would be a comfort to Verplank; “what
I like is to attend to gentlemen whose wives
have deceived them. Outraged husbands,
monsieur, that is my specialty!”</p>
<p>Verplank brushed him aside, shook his foil,
and called at de Fresnoy.</p>
<p>“Are the three minutes up?”</p>
<p>“Monsieur!” the old surgeon protested.</p>
<p>The young surgeon intervened.</p>
<p>“But, monsieur——”</p>
<p>De Fresnoy motioned at them.</p>
<p>“Is he in a condition to continue?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_157">[157]</a></span></p>
<p>“Why not?” Verplank scornfully replied.</p>
<p>He raised his left hand, and, with a gesture
of excuse, turned and spat. He looked up.
His mouth was on fire, his jaw burned, the
wound in his cheek was a flame. Yet these
things but added to the intensity of his eyes.
They blazed. There was blood on his face,
on his chin, on his shirt, on his feet. He
was hideous. But he was a man, and a mad
one.</p>
<p>“He ought to be horsewhipped,” muttered
Silverstairs, glaring as he spoke at Barouffski,
who was talking to his seconds.</p>
<p>“On guard, then!” called de Fresnoy.</p>
<p>“Permit me, permit me,” cried Tyszkiewicz.
“The point of my principal’s sword is broken.”</p>
<p>“Give him another then,” de Fresnoy
roughly threw out. Insolently he added:
“And teach him how to use it.” In a moment,
when from the other bag, a foil had
been got and measured, “On guard,” he repeated.</p>
<p>Again he united the foils. Again he gave
the command.</p>
<p>For a moment the weapons clashed.</p>
<p>Suddenly and excitedly Palencia cried:
“My principal is touched.”</p>
<p>“Halt,” de Fresnoy, intervening with raised
stick, commanded.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_158">[158]</a></span></p>
<p>Verplank moved back. “Damn him,” he
muttered, “I haven’t done with him yet.”</p>
<p>About Barouffski now, Palencia and the
young man with the serious face had come.
The latter was examining Barouffski’s right
arm. On it a thin red line was visible. Very
gravely the young man looked up.</p>
<p>“My client is disabled. Profound incision
in the region of the flexor digitorum sublimis
accompanied by a notable effusion of blood.”</p>
<p>The old surgeon chuckled. Confidentially
as before he addressed Verplank. “I know
that term. It means a scratch. Those ladies
there, it must amuse even them.”</p>
<p>As he spoke he indicated a window at which
Violet and Leilah had appeared, but from
which now Leilah was retreating.</p>
<p>Verplank did not hear, did not see. The
young surgeon, resuming, had announced himself
as opposed to a continuation of the encounter.
It was this that preoccupied Verplank.</p>
<p>Loudly and angrily he cried: “Let’s have
pistols then. That man can use his left hand
and I’ll do the same.”</p>
<p>“Cristi! La jolie dame!” the old surgeon
muttered to himself.</p>
<p>In the doorway Leilah had come. Hurriedly
she moved to Verplank. As she did so
Barouffski tried to prevent her.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_159">[159]</a></span></p>
<p>“Cara mia, I must beg of you——”</p>
<p>He had got in her way but she eluded him,
while the other men looked curiously at this
woman who now agitatedly was addressing
Verplank.</p>
<p>“Don’t fight any more, don’t!”</p>
<p>Roughly Verplank answered: “I haven’t
begun.”</p>
<p>“Sir,” cried Barouffski. “I can permit no
conversation with this lady.”</p>
<p>Verplank ignoring Barouffski as utterly as
he had ignored the surgeon, looked at Leilah.</p>
<p>“That story of yours is——”</p>
<p>But whatever he may have intended to say,
Barouffski interrupted. He was shouting at
Verplank, calling, too, at Leilah whom he
had got by the arm and whom he would have
drawn away, but this Verplank prevented.
Shifting his foil to his left hand, with his right
he seized Barouffski and with a twist which
separated him from Leilah, shoved him aside.</p>
<p>“To your shambles!” he called at him.</p>
<p>But already the others were intervening.
Tyszkiewicz with his eternal “Permit me,” got
between the two men. Palencia held Barouffski
by the shoulder. Silverstairs drew Verplank
away, while de Fresnoy, viewing the
situation as hopeless, declared the duel at an
end.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_160">[160]</a></span></p>
<p>The actions of all were practically so simultaneous
that they were as one to Leilah
who, bewildered by the confusion which she
herself had caused, horrified by Verplank’s
appearance and tortured by the riddle of his
interrupted words, now, over the heads of the
others, again called to him:</p>
<p>“You say that the story is——”</p>
<p>“At five!” Verplank threw back.</p>
<p>Barouffski, bursting with rage and impotence,
shouted:</p>
<p>“I say this conversation must cease.”</p>
<p>The old surgeon, nudging his colleague,
laughed:</p>
<p>“There is my specialty!”</p>
<p>Both surgeons then were occupied with their
bags. De Fresnoy, overhearing the remark,
could not but smile. To conceal it he turned
to the gate where he was joined by Silverstairs
and where at once, Palencia and Tyszkiewicz
followed, leaving in the center of the garden
Leilah and her two husbands, one of whom
with a shrug which for an American was
perhaps rather French, went to the bench
where his coat lay.</p>
<p>In this instance again the actions of all so
closely coincided that barely an instant intervened
before Leilah was throwing after Verplank
the two syllables he had thrown at her.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_161">[161]</a></span></p>
<p>“At five!”</p>
<p>Later she was unconscious of having done
so. But Barouffski heard and presently, when
the others had gone and in this garden those
two were alone, with angry suspicion he confronted
her.</p>
<p>“Five! What is that? What does it mean?”</p>
<p>Leilah had turned to go. A bit unsteadily
she moved on, reached the entrance, leaned
there for support.</p>
<p>But Barouffski was at her heels.</p>
<p>“Five,” he repeated. “He said it, you said
it, what does it mean?”</p>
<p>“It means that God willing some day I
may have peace.”</p>
<p>She had half-turned. She turned again. In
a moment she had gone.</p>
<p>Menacingly Barouffski’s eyes followed her.
“That’s what five means, does it?”</p>
<p>Then he too turned. Nearby, on the marble
chair, were his coat and waistcoat. Slowly,
thoughtfully, he put them on. As he did so he
noticed the dogs. It may have seemed to him
then that they were his only friends. Longly
he looked their way.</p>
<p>Suddenly, as though illumination had come,
he touched a bell and looked up at Leilah’s
window.</p>
<p>After a brief delay, Emmanuel appeared.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_162">[162]</a></span></p>
<p>“Shut the gate,” Barouffski ordered.</p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le comte,” the footman
very deferentially replied and started to
do as bidden.</p>
<p>Barouffski checked him. Indicating the
lower window, he added:</p>
<p>“At five or thereabouts be in there. I will
tell you then what to do. You hear me?”</p>
<p>“Perfectly, monsieur le comte.”</p>
<p>Again Barouffski glanced at the upper window.
As he glanced he smiled.</p>
<p>“Cara mia, five may mean more things than
you say, more even than you think.”</p>
<p>He was still smiling but it was not a pleasant
smile to see.</p>
<p>Beneath his breath, Emmanuel, who was
looking at him, muttered:</p>
<p>“Quelle gueule de maquereau!”</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_163">[163]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="X">X</a></h2>
<p>“Gracious!” Violet exclaimed. She had
been smoking and now in putting a cigarette
in a cendrier she had succeeded in overturning
it. Undismayed she looked at a clock.
“Gracious!” she repeated. “Since that stupid
duel, I have sat here an hour.”</p>
<p>Leisurely the lady arose. She was a glowing
object in this room which, filled with costly
futilities and furnished in canary and black,
otherwise was Empire and brilliant. The
main entrance, hung with heavy portières of
yellow damask had, opposite it, across the
room, a tapestry panel which masked a spiral
stairway that led below. To one side, at an
elaborate table, which now the overturned cendrier
had strewn with ashes, Leilah was seated.
Behind her, through an open window, shone
the eager sun. Before her, rising from a sofa
was her friend.</p>
<p>Leilah wished that she would go, wished
too that she would stay, wished rather—as at
times we all wish of those who are near us—that
she were different, less mondaine perhaps,
more simple. To Violet, the spectacle in the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_164">[164]</a></span>
garden had been tedious. To Leilah it was
horrible. Moreover the atmosphere of blood
and hate, the enigma of Verplank’s words, the
menaces of Barouffski’s eyes, these things
frightened her, inducing a dread which
seemed to brood not in the mind but in the
body. She could have put a hand to her girdle
and have said: “It is here.” In addition
she felt—as in every spiritual crisis we all do—alone.
Of this she could not tell Violet.
She felt that she lacked the power to express
it and that Violet lacked the ability to understand.
Pain has accents which only its graduates
know. Violet, in all her brilliant life,
had never shed a poignant tear.</p>
<p>“What do you propose to do now?” the
lady was asking.</p>
<p>Cheerlessly Leilah replied: “My duty.”</p>
<p>Here was something which Violet did understand.
Brightly she nodded.</p>
<p>“Yes, and I may tell you that it is your duty
to preserve your looks and avoid a scandal. I
did not at all like your fantasia in the garden.
A gentlewoman never does anything important
and that was an important thing. In no time
it will be all over the place. You can believe
that, can’t you?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know what to believe.”</p>
<p>Violet laughed. “I always believe what I<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_165">[165]</a></span>
like. That I find so satisfactory. Apropos.
What was that story about which Verplank
was shouting? Mercy! I could have heard
him a mile away.”</p>
<p>In weary protest Leilah shook her head.
“You know I can’t tell you.”</p>
<p>“The same old thing, was it? But how
antiquated you are! Really it is piteous.
There are no secrets any more. All that sort
of thing went out with hoopskirts. Private
life which used to be a sealed book has become
an open newspaper. It is plain for instance,
plain to everybody, plain as a pikestaff that
you are still in love with Verplank. What you
left him for the Lord in his infinite wisdom
and mercy only knows. That is a secret certainly
but only because you choose to make it
one. It is no secret to me though that you
are dying to go back to him. But don’t you
know you can’t? Don’t you know it? Don’t
you know that you can’t budge an inch until
you have shipped Barouffski? Now how are
you going to do that? Tell me.”</p>
<p>Leilah made a pass with a hand. It was as
though, in some rite known but to her, she were
consulting the lap of the invisible gods and,
in it, the equally invisible future.</p>
<p>“Then I will tell you. You have got to buy
him off. Listen to this. I will pack Silverstairs<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_166">[166]</a></span>
straight to the Embassy. There he will
get all the law and most of the prophets.
Meanwhile promise that you’ll keep your
head.”</p>
<p>“I will try,” Leilah, mechanically, her
thoughts afar, replied.</p>
<p>“There!” Violet exclaimed. “That’s right.
When there is a divorce in the air it’s so much
better to try than to be tried.”</p>
<p>At the inane jest she laughed, embraced her
friend. In a moment she had gone, distributing
as she went a faint, sweet smell of orris.</p>
<p>Leilah who had risen moved to the window
and looked out at the gate through which
Verplank would come. It was as she had said:
She did not know what to believe and mutely
for a moment she prayed for guidance.</p>
<p>“O, Lords of Karma, Watchers of the Seven
Spheres, grant me so to live that, hereafter, I
may say, I have harmed no heart, I have made
no one weep. Out of your infinite bounty
grant that somewhere, sometime, there may be
peace to Gulian’s soul and mine.”</p>
<p>The prayer concluded she felt securer. Momentarily
the cancer of anxiety had ceased to
gnaw, the fascination of fear had departed.
In the respite she turned to the clock. It
was nearly five and she rang for one of her
women.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_167">[167]</a></span></p>
<p>“Parker,” she began, when the servant appeared.</p>
<p>“Yes, my lady.”</p>
<p>“Presently, in a few minutes, a gentleman
will come by the gate. Be there and bring him
here. Bring him through the dining room and
up the back way. If possible, I prefer that no
one should see him.”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lady. Thank your ladyship.”</p>
<p>At once, with that air which those acquire
who attended to delicate matters, the woman
drew aside the tapestry that masked the stair,
which then discreetly, almost atiptoe, she descended.</p>
<p>As the tapestry fell again, instantly there returned
to Leilah the sense of evil and impending
ill. The brilliant room seemed full of terrors.
In each bright corner a danger lurked.
So strong was the impression that she felt it
must be she was being warned, that she was
being visited by those obscure phenomena
which occultists call impacts from the astral,
and that these were urging her to go, to meet
Verplank without, in the garden, in the street,
anywhere except in this fastidiousness.</p>
<p>Coerced by the impression, she entered an
adjoining room, got there a fichu which she
put on her head, a light wrap which she drew
about her. Excited as she was, unaided as<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_168">[168]</a></span>
well, it took several minutes before she could
find these accouterments. When, at last equipped,
she re-entered the sitting room, she
started.</p>
<p>Before her, his hat on, one side of his face
medallioned with courtplaster, stood Verplank.</p>
<p>At sight of Leilah, he removed his hat which
he tossed on the sofa and said at once and simply
enough:</p>
<p>“That story of yours is false as Judas.”</p>
<p>“Gulian!” At the moment it was all she
found, but then fancy a blind man dazzled.</p>
<p>Verplank nodded. “Yes. The letters you
received at Coronado—there were three of
them, were there not? three written on gray
paper each signed Effingham Verplank?—well,
my father wrote them, that’s true
enough, but he wrote them to your aunt, your
mother’s sister, Hilda Hemingway. Did you
never hear that the governor had an affair with
her? Did you?”</p>
<p>Leilah’s face spoke for her. From the bewilderment
there, it was obvious that of it all
she was ignorant.</p>
<p>With an uplift of the chin Verplank considered
her.</p>
<p>“That’s odd, girls generally only hear what
they ought not to. However, Hemingway became<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_169">[169]</a></span>
suspicious—for very good reasons, no
doubt, or, if you prefer, for very bad ones—the
result being that his wife turned the letters
over for safe keeping to your mother.
When she died your father found them. He
did not stop there, he showed them to my
mother. My mother knew the facts, but she
said your father was so convinced of your
mother’s infidelity that it seemed a pity to disabuse
him. Those were her very words to me
to-day.”</p>
<p>“Gulian!” Still Leilah found but that.
Visibly the light was there. As yet she could
not credit it.</p>
<p>Again, but now appreciatively, Verplank
nodded. “Yes. I know. It does seem queer.
But then my mother is not the ordinary woman.
She thought the governor so created to
conquer that it no more occurred to her to sit
in judgment on his victims than it occurred to
her to sit on him. In the true spirit of Christian
charity she overlooked it all.”</p>
<p>Verplank paused, opened and closed a hand.
“It was not matrimony perhaps, but it was
magnificent,” he obliging resumed, forgetting
wholly that it was not in him to do likewise.</p>
<p>“Come,” he added. From the start, Leilah’s
apparel, the fichu and wrap, had made him
fancy that she was as ready to go as he was to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_170">[170]</a></span>
take her and it all seemed very simple. “Come.
Let’s be off. I have a cab for you.”</p>
<p>But at the suggestion which was a command
she undid the lace, loosened the cloak.</p>
<p>“Gulian, I cannot.”</p>
<p>“Cannot!” he angrily repeated. “Why
can’t you? Have you not heard what I said.
You are not my sister, you are my wife.
Come.”</p>
<p>“Gulian! You do not know what you ask!”</p>
<p>“I know perfectly well. If you hesitate it is
because you do not believe me. But would I
urge you if that malignity were true? Would
I?”</p>
<p>“Gulian, no, you would not.”</p>
<p>“There! You see! You have to believe
me.”</p>
<p>“It is not that.”</p>
<p>“It is the divorce then! But you are no more
married to that dismal cad than I am to one of
your maids. Except in Nevada the decree has
no effect whatever. But without bothering to
have it set aside, come with me and let this saurian
get another.”</p>
<p>“Gulian, yes, but for the moment surely you
can see that this is impossible.”</p>
<p>“Impossible! There is nothing impossible.
Why do you say so? Why do you make so
many objections? You should not make any.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_171">[171]</a></span>
You hear a cock-and-bull story, take it for gospel,
run away, get a divorce, marry a damned
scoundrel and, when you find the story is a brutal
lie, stick like a leech to him.”</p>
<p>“Gulian, if you but knew. My position is
horrible——”</p>
<p>She wanted to tell him that she was in a
prison replete with tortures, one from which
she was as eager to go as he was to take her, yet
one from which she could not escape through
the open door of sinning.</p>
<p>He gave her no time. Instantly he interrupted
her.</p>
<p>“I know your position, it is all of your own
making, too. By God, you can make up your
mind to one thing. You’ll come, if I have to
take you.”</p>
<p>As he spoke he looked so brutal that she
shrank.</p>
<p>“Gulian, you will kill me. I thought so before.
I know it now.”</p>
<p>“It is only what you deserve.”</p>
<p>“Gulian! And you said you loved me!”</p>
<p>“Yes, but you make me doubt it.”</p>
<p>The wrap which previously she had loosened
she let fall on a chair beside her and put
the fichu on the table.</p>
<p>“Gulian, you must give me time.”</p>
<p>The words were simple, plaintively uttered,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_172">[172]</a></span>
but her action with the cloak and lace, gave
them an emphasis which added to his irritation.</p>
<p>“Nonsense,” he retorted. “You have had
time enough. Now you must act.” Roughly
he considered her. “Anyone else might think
you cared for that——”</p>
<p>“Gulian, in all the world you know I love
but you.”</p>
<p>Verplank raised the cloak, reached for the
fichu.</p>
<p>“Put these on, then, and come.”</p>
<p>But Leilah, with a gesture that was less of
resistance than of appeal, motioned them from
her. The gesture infuriated him. He threw
the cloak about her.</p>
<p>“By God! You shall put them on. What’s
more, you will come whether or not you want
to.”</p>
<p>As he spoke he seized her, lifted her.</p>
<p>To Leilah it seemed as though she were
about to be carried off violently, like a prey.
Unresistingly she raised her face to his.</p>
<p>“Gulian, kill me. It will be better; it will
end it all.”</p>
<p>Something, the words, the tone in which they
were uttered, the helplessness of them and of
her; but, more than anything else perhaps, the
fact that as he held her he felt her tremble,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_173">[173]</a></span>
stayed him. He put her down. His arms fell
from her.</p>
<p>Catching again at the chair she steadied
herself, and added:</p>
<p>“But if I am to live and love you, be patient.
Gulian, if you would stop to think, to realise,
you would be patient, you——”</p>
<p>He started from her. “You don’t mean——”</p>
<p>At the question and its insinuation, hotly she
flushed. Verplank saw but the flush. The
day previous she had told him that she had
taken Barouffski to serve as a barricade between
them. Since then he had cajoled his
imagination with the idea that the creature
stood to her as husbands do on the stage, show
entities who, the rôle performed, cease otherwise
to be husbands. Now the idea seemed to
him hideously naïf. The flush refuted it. It
did more. It revealed not only other relations
but the result of them. Instantly he divined
that it was for this that she refused to go. At
once within him waked the primitive, the aboriginal
self that lurks always and, save in the
high crises of the emotions, sleeps always within
us all. He was in that condition in which
men slay with bare hands and afterward consider
them marvelingly, wondering at whose
command they could have worked. Perspiration
came to his forehead, started about his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_174">[174]</a></span>
nose and mouth. With the fichu which he
held he wiped them, but on the table from
which he had taken it was a layer of dust
and ashes, the refuse of the cendrier which
Violet had overturned. It streaked his
face, griming him with a mask comic and
sinister.</p>
<p>With that mask, he called at her.</p>
<p>“Then may you be forever damned.”</p>
<p>The malediction passed from him, reached
her, shook her. She held to the chair for support.
Then indignantly she protested.</p>
<p>“Gulian!”</p>
<p>He did not hear. An idea had come to him,
one that had visited him in Melbourne, again
in New York, to desist from further effort, to
leave her where she was, behind the barriers
she had raised. At the moment he believed he
desired her no longer, loved her no more, had
never loved her at all. Occupied with the idea
he looked at this woman who had ruined her
life, ruined his own.</p>
<p>She had been saying something, what he did
not know nor, self-centered in his anger, did he
care.</p>
<p>In his pocket was a revolver. He felt of it
and infuriatedly cried:</p>
<p>“You ought to be shot.”</p>
<p>“Gulian!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_175">[175]</a></span></p>
<p>“You are on a par with the beast you took
up with.”</p>
<p>“I took his name, Gulian, his name alone.”</p>
<p>It was her turn to be angry. The flush had
gone, she was pale again and she had abandoned
the chair’s support. She stood upright,
confronting him with that purity which was
hers.</p>
<p>“I have no more been his wife than I was
yours.”</p>
<p>“What!”</p>
<p>This time he heard. But her words,
conflicting with his thoughts, rolled over
together. In this mental confusion he
stared.</p>
<p>“What!”</p>
<p>“It is as I tell you.”</p>
<p>“You swear it?”</p>
<p>“Do I need to?”</p>
<p>Still he stared. Truth which acts on us and
in us like a chemical precipitate was disclosing
to him her whiteness and its own.</p>
<p>“Do I?” she repeated.</p>
<p>“No, by God, you don’t. I believe you. I
can’t help myself. It is in your eyes.”</p>
<p>He paused and awkwardly added:</p>
<p>“Forgive me.”</p>
<p>Faintly and sadly she smiled.</p>
<p>“Will you?” he asked.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_176">[176]</a></span></p>
<p>“Kiss me.”</p>
<p>In the unique syllables of the words, which
in a woman’s mouth are so fluid, there was a
forgiveness so entire and a love so great that
in passionate contrition he drew her to him.
Longly their lips met. She closed her eyes,
opened them, disengaged herself, moved back
a step and looked at him. For the first time
she noticed the grime on his face. It did not
astonish. It seemed natural after what they
had both been through and it occurred to her
that her own appearance might be equally
bizarre.</p>
<p>Briefly then, in this lull in the storm, she told
him what Violet had suggested—the buying
and divorce of Barouffski.</p>
<p>“That will take time,” he objected. “The
shortest way ’round is the quickest way out. If
you had not interfered in the garden——”</p>
<p>A gesture completed the sentence.</p>
<p>“No matter,” he grimly added. “I haven’t
done with him yet.”</p>
<p>In speaking he had crossed the room, now
he recrossed it.</p>
<p>Imploringly Leilah approached him.</p>
<p>“Gulian, not that, not that! Don’t fight with
him again. Don’t, I beseech you. It is not
alone that anything of the kind is so horrible
but he is one of the trickiest swordsmen here.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_177">[177]</a></span>
Think what that means! Think what would
become of me if—if——”</p>
<p>From the pocket of his coat Verplank had
taken the revolver. He looked at it, looked at
her, replaced it.</p>
<p>“I am a trifle interested in the matter myself.
Besides, there are other weapons than the
foil. If I can shoot pigeons—and I believe I
can—I ought to be able to land a buzzard.”</p>
<p>At sight of the revolver Leilah had winced.
Now she cried:</p>
<p>“Give it to me!”</p>
<p>Verplank, amused at her simplicity, smiled.</p>
<p>“That isn’t a dueling pistol.”</p>
<p>“But you never carried one before.”</p>
<p>“In the States I did not need to. Here, in
Paris, particularly at night, the streets are seldom
sure. I have this thing for protection.”</p>
<p>“Promise me then——”</p>
<p>Verplank looked her over.</p>
<p>“Don’t be a fool.”</p>
<p>But as he looked, suddenly she started and
he saw that she was trembling.</p>
<p>“What the deuce is the matter?”</p>
<p>Trembling still, peeringly now she had turned
to the portières.</p>
<p>“What is it?” he repeated.</p>
<p>“I am so frightened.”</p>
<p>“Frightened? What at?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_178">[178]</a></span></p>
<p>Uncertainly, her head drawn back as a
deer’s is when surprised, she glanced about
her. Slowly then her eyes returned to his.</p>
<p>“I am so frightened!”</p>
<p>“Yes, but at what?”</p>
<p>She motioned at the room. “Before you
came there seemed to be something here,
something around me and just now——”</p>
<p>“Well?”</p>
<p>“I heard something.”</p>
<p>“Your maid probably.”</p>
<p>With an intake of the breath she raised a
finger and for a moment both were silent.</p>
<p>“There is no one,” he presently told her.
“And what if there were!”</p>
<p>At the idea, he laughed.</p>
<p>The laugh, succeeding the silence, while intended
to reassure her, did not wholly succeed.
She turned to him anew and in a low voice,
said:</p>
<p>“You must go. To-morrow come to Violet’s.”</p>
<p>“I dine there to-night.”</p>
<p>“Yes, I know. Tell her that to-morrow, say
at three, we will both be with her. Then she
can tell us——”</p>
<p>But Verplank had drawn her to him. Again
her eyes closed.</p>
<p>“Go,” she said at last.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_179">[179]</a></span></p>
<p>On the sofa was his hat. He reached for it.
While he did so, she moved to the tapestry,
raised it, disclosing the stair up which he had
come.</p>
<p>“To-morrow, then,” he said, as he entered
there.</p>
<p>She nodded at him. “At three!”</p>
<p>Dropping the tapestry she turned, but very
quickly, for again she heard or thought she
heard a noise.</p>
<p>Across the room the portières were parting.
Through them Barouffski appeared.</p>
<p>“I might have known it,” she told herself,
and realising that he had been listening, she
realised also that the opportunity was as good
as another for making an offer which she had
in mind.</p>
<p>These ideas, instantaneous at sight of him,
were for the moment stayed. On turning she
had seen but the man. Now hastening toward
her was a creature with an expression so venomous
that instinctively, in search of help,
with the idea of calling to Verplank, she
turned to the tapestry again.</p>
<p>Quicker than she, he caught and tossed her
spinning on the sofa. Then, running to the
open window, he shouted from it:</p>
<p>“Emmanuel! The dogs!”</p>
<p>Leilah, falling backward on the lounge, was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_180">[180]</a></span>
too stunned to hear. But she steadied herself,
recovered, got to her feet and making again for
the stair, called at Barouffski:</p>
<p>“Free me from you and you shall have half
of what I have.”</p>
<p>“Half!” he repeated. At once he was upon
her. “All,” he cried. “I want it all, all of
yours and all of his.”</p>
<p>As he spoke he struck her, shoved her aside,
raised the tapestry and vanished. For a second
she heard him hastening down, while at once
from without came the barking of dogs, the
jar of oaths, the sound of cries.</p>
<p>What it meant she did not know. Her head
was whirling. The fall, the blow, the indignity
of both clouded and confused her. From
without the uproar mounted and suddenly, the
uproar prompting, into the turmoil that was
her mind, a gleam of understanding shot. At
the apperception of it she shrieked, ran to the
window where she shrieked again. The loosened
dogs had sprung at Verplank, who, overwhelmed
had fallen.</p>
<p>Again she shrieked. Answering the shriek,
mingling with it, were snarls, the gnashing of
fangs, the din of great hounds ferociously
struggling for blood, tearing vehemently at
flesh, at a flesh, though, that rebelled.</p>
<p>Verplank rose up between them. With a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_181">[181]</a></span>
kick he sent one of them sprawling. But, in
the recoil, torn at by the other hound, he
stumbled. The dog was at his throat. In protection
he held his left arm against it. With
his right hand he got at the revolver in his
pocket, and, through the pocket, fired twice
into the brute. Gnashing still, it rolled away.</p>
<p>But now, from the other side, the second
hound was on him. He saw its eyes, felt its
breath, felt its fangs. Again he fired. As he
did so, his hand relaxed. He heard a woman
shrieking, the sound of hurrying feet. The
wall before him mounted. His senses scattered
into night.</p>
<p>Suddenly the garden was filled with people.
Through the gate, two sergents de ville had
come. These, forms furtive and uncertain followed.
From the house, led by Barouffski,
the footmen ran. Above, from the window,
still there issued a woman’s shrieks.</p>
<p>Barouffski stopped, and turned. He looked
up at the window. He smiled. With one hand
he tapped his breast, with the other he pointed
at Verplank. Then, in French, reassuringly,
he called:</p>
<p>“My dear! See! You may be tranquil. I,
I am unharmed. It is the robber.”</p>
<p>At the ignominy of that flouting jeer, Leilah,
impelled by the impulse to do something,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_182">[182]</a></span>
though it were but to beat her head against a
wall, rushed from the window, and, strangling
with spasms, fled out of the room and down the
stair, where horror so suffocatingly enveloped
her that in it her brain tipped, and she fell.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_183">[183]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="XI">XI</a></h2>
<p>In the golden half light of the Opéra, a
chorus, soprano voices on one side of the stage
alternating with contralto on the other, vaporised
the subtle sensuality of the scene.</p>
<p>Violet Silverstairs, turning to her husband,
who was seated behind her, remarked:</p>
<p>“How much better the Italian school is than
the French.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, ignorant of either, and indifferent
to both, promenaded his glass about the
house.</p>
<p>“I wonder why Tempest doesn’t show up?
There is Marie de Fresnoy! I saw de Fresnoy
to-day for the first time since his duel with
Barouffski. What a ridiculous affair that was!
I suppose one of these days he will have another
with d’Arcy.”</p>
<p>Violet turned to him again.</p>
<p>“Because of Marie? How absurd you are!
D’Arcy doesn’t interest her. No man could
unless he drove at her with a four-in-hand,
and d’Arcy has nothing.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, still promenading his glass, exclaimed:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_184">[184]</a></span></p>
<p>“There he is now!”</p>
<p>“Who? D’Arcy?”</p>
<p>“Yes, with the Helley-Quetgens, in that box
between the columns. Isn’t that your friend
Leilah whom he is talking to? By Jove, it is,
and Barouffski is there, also.”</p>
<p>Violet, who had also been promenading her
glass, put it down.</p>
<p>“Well, he ought to be. I do think she has
acted scandalously. What is said at the club?”</p>
<p>“About Verplank? It is forgotten already.
Barouffski, you know, claimed that it was a
mistake, and as it appears that Verplank
agreed with him, as from neither the one nor
the other any charge was forthcoming, the
police could do nothing but get Verplank back
to the Ritz.”</p>
<p>Impatiently Violet unfurled her fan.</p>
<p>“Yes, where she has been every day; every
day, that is, when she has not been with
d’Arcy.”</p>
<p>The statement was inexact. Leilah had indeed
been at the Ritz but d’Arcy she had seen
but once, momentarily, by accident—if there
be such a thing, in any event through one of
those seeming hazards which, however fortuitous
at first, afterward appear to have been
designed. It was a little, though, before Leilah
took that view of things. Meanwhile, when,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_185">[185]</a></span>
on recovering from her swoon, she learned that
Verplank had also recovered she realised with
thanksgiving that Destiny which has its tyrannies
has its mercies as well. So soon then as
she could get from the bed into which the
horrors of the midspring nightmare had
thrown her, she went to the Ritz where she
found Verplank amply attended, abundantly
bandaged, severely but not dangerously
hurt.</p>
<p>“One of the brutes nearly chewed my arm
off,” he told her. “If the other omitted to eat
me entirely, it was not because he did not try.
I did for them, though,” he added, and smiled
as he said it. After the manner of man, he
took comfort in the feat.</p>
<p>“But not for the worst brute,” Leilah answered
wishing in spite of herself, wishing instinctively
and even ungrammatically that
some good fate might.</p>
<p>From beneath a bandage, Verplank
laughed:</p>
<p>“Bah! I’ll do for him, too.”</p>
<p>But Leilah did not hear. She was speaking
to the surgeon, whom—with a bravery which
in itself was a little defiant, and which in any
event might have been more discreet—thereafter,
daily and openly, she supplied with that
which every surgeon wants, a nurse obedient,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_186">[186]</a></span>
attentive, skilful, alert, and who, in addition
ministers for love.</p>
<p>Presently, Verplank was able to be up. The
surgeon said that in a day he would be able to
be out. Verplank, who knew as much without
being told, asked Leilah to go with him on the
morrow.</p>
<p>Leilah refused. Verplank, for an invalid,
became then surprisingly demoniac. The
demonism of him affected her less than a conception,
feminine perhaps but erroneous, of
her own selfishness. If she went, she knew beforehand
that irremissibly she would be dishonoured.
But she knew also that any sense
of dishonour must, if it is to ashame, come
not from without but from within. If she
went, her conscience, she thought, would
acquit her. She thought that she would not
feel dishonoured, though she knew that she
would be disgraced. To refuse on that account
seemed to her selfish. As a result finally
she consented. Yet in consenting she made one
stipulation. Characteristic in itself, it was
that there must be nothing clandestine, that
he must come for her in the rue de la Pompe,
and that from there, her boxes put on whatever
vehicle he brought, they would leave for darkness
by daylight.</p>
<p>The plan pleased Verplank. He agreed at<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_187">[187]</a></span>
once. He told her that he would come the
next day.</p>
<p>When he had, she added: “To-night I go to
the Opéra; the Helley-Quetgens have asked
me. It is my last look at this world.”</p>
<p>Then, shortly, the arrangements for the evasion
completed, she left the hotel.</p>
<p>Without, her motor waited. She told the
groom to have it follow her. The air tempted,
though the sky was dirty. She thought of the
California glare, the eager glitter of New
York. She wondered would they go back
there. Perhaps, she told herself, we shall at
last see Bora-Bora.</p>
<p>Her walk took her through the arcades of
the rue de Rivoli to the fountains of the Place
de la Concorde. From there she was about to
enter the Champs Elysées when she became
conscious of being accosted.</p>
<p>“Chère madame,” some one was saying, “I
precipitate myself to renew the expression of
my homage.”</p>
<p>D’Arcy, hat in hand, was before her. At
once, with a view to what the French agreeably
describe as the placing of landmarks—<i lang="fr">pour
poser des jalons</i>—he asked to be permitted
to accompany her.</p>
<p>Leilah smiled.</p>
<p>“Not for the world!”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_188">[188]</a></span></p>
<p>She motioned at the motor. Then, with that
graciousness which is natural to the mondaine,
with perhaps the desire also to attenuate whatever
there were of brusqueness in her reply,
she added, as she got in the car:</p>
<p>“I shall be at the Opéra with the Helley-Quetgens
to-night. Could you not look in?”</p>
<p>D’Arcy, habituated to the abruptest victories,
accustomed to inflame, with but a glance,
by the mere exhibition of his Olympian good
looks, and, therefore, indifferent when not
bored by the celerity of his successes, but
piqued by the tranquil air with which this
woman had always regarded him, thanked her,
assured her that he would not fail to be there,
and replaced his hat.</p>
<p>Immediately he raised it again, straight
from the head, high in the air. Looking with
brilliant eyes from a brilliant brougham,
Violet Silverstairs was dashing by.</p>
<p>Coincidentally, unobserved but observant,
Barouffski was also passing that way.</p>
<p>Leilah’s motor flew off and she sank back,
wondering at herself, wondering rather what
influence, malign and unhallowed, could possibly
have prompted her to ask this man, whom
she disliked as—in spite of a theory to the
contrary—honest women do dislike a man of
his type. But though, at the time, she could<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_189">[189]</a></span>
not understand what impelled her, later it
seemed to her that it must have been fate.</p>
<p>Barouffski had a different interpretation.
At the Joyeuses he had seen Leilah and
d’Arcy together. Now, here they were again.
The circumstance, of which the fortuitousness
was unknown to him, irritated him for that
very cause. But he could imagine and did.
At once it was clear to him that the brute was
after the blue eyes of her bankbook. The deduction,
however erroneous, was easy. He was
viewing the matter, not, as he fancied, from
d’Arcy’s standpoint, but from his own. In
spite of which, or rather precisely on that account,
he told himself that d’Arcy was a
damned scoundrel. The humour of this quite
escaped him. But that perhaps was in the
order of things.</p>
<p>Since the night at the Joyeuses, he had been
measuring himself solely against Verplank.
Twice he had failed with him, but he knew
that soon they would be at each other again
and for the next bout he had in view a coup
which, he felt, would do for him definitely.
Meanwhile, if in regard to Leilah he had
been led into certain vivacities, he felt that
with time, which is the great emollient, her
memory of these vivacities would pass. Even
otherwise, the law was with him. He proposed<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_190">[190]</a></span>
to see to it that she was also—she and
with her her purse. The one menace to both
had been Verplank. Here, now, apparently,
was another. Here was d’Arcy with his
pseudo-Pheidian air, that famous yet false
appearance of a young and dissolute Olympian
which made imbeciles turn and stare. Ragingly
Barouffski reflected that canaille though
d’Arcy were, he carried a great many guns, almost
as many as Verplank, who, worse luck,
had, in addition, the signal advantage of being
Leilah’s first love—that love to which it is
said one always returns.</p>
<p>But even as he sounded the stupidity of
that aphorism, vaguely, for a dim second, he
intercepted a gleam refracted from truth. The
danger with which he had to contend, Verplank
did not personify or d’Arcy either, it
was himself. When the golden six was tossed
him, had he but then known how to secure the
box, there would now be no danger at all. But
truth, when it does not console, confounds.
Barouffski put it from him. It was too exasperating.
“Bah!” he told himself, “if her
attitude does not change, a sojourn in the solitudes
of Lithuania may alter it.” Angrily he
nodded. Things more surprising have occurred
there.</p>
<p>On this day it was Leilah who surprised him.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_191">[191]</a></span></p>
<p>Since he had called to her from the garden,
she had encountered him only in the hazards
of entrances and halls. On such occasions she
had passed with an air of being unaware that
there were anything save chairs and tables
about.</p>
<p>In part, it was this attitude which he thought
certain solitudes might change. Oddly enough,
Leilah herself wished it altered. But to want
to do one thing and to do something else, happens
to all of us, even to the best. She despised
Barouffski and yet in despising him knew
that the one contemptible thing is contempt.
For what he had done, she felt that no punishment
could be too severe, yet in so feeling she
knew that he was only the embodiment of past
misdeeds of her own. Physically he had struck
her. Spiritually, it was her own hand that had
dealt the blow. He had loosed the dogs on
Verplank and she had judged and condemned
him for it, though she knew that not only she
should not judge at all, but that never perhaps
do useless events occur. Clearly these events
were evil, but were not those which she
planned evil too?</p>
<p>In this dilemma there was some slight consolation
for her in the knowledge that it was
not her fault, at least not her present fault, that
she had been born with a nature so problematic.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_192">[192]</a></span>
But the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>, in teaching her that
whatever we suffer is derived from our past;
that the people who wrong us—or seem to—are
mere puppets come to claim karmic debts
which we owe; the <cite>Vidyâ</cite>, in teaching her that
taught her also that every life we lead here is
but a day in school. Her schooling, she felt,
had as yet been insufficient. No doubt she
would know better when she came here again.</p>
<p>The thin gilt hope of that fortified her a
little on this day when, to Barouffski’s surprise,
she sent for him and then, her head raised, said
distantly:</p>
<p>“The Helley-Quetgens have asked us to
the Opéra. I am going. You are free to do
as you like.”</p>
<p>Here, obviously, was something new. At
it and at her Barouffski looked with shifting
eyes. Uncertainly he rubbed his hands.</p>
<p>“But how then! I am at your orders. It is
a festival to be where you are.”</p>
<p>But as he did nothing without an object, he
wondered what hers was. Obviously, there
was a reason. Yet, what? Could it be an olive
branch? He was too adroit to ask. Even
otherwise, he lacked the opportunity. Leilah
had gone from the room.</p>
<p>It was in these circumstances that, on this
night, she appeared at the Opéra where Violet<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_193">[193]</a></span>
was complaining at having seen her with
d’Arcy.</p>
<p>At the complaint, Silverstairs pulled at his
moustache.</p>
<p>“I did not know that she had taken up with
him.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know that she has either. But she
was with him to-day in the Champs Elysées.”</p>
<p>“Oh, come now! Things haven’t got to such
a pass that a woman can’t be seen with a
man——”</p>
<p>“No, but no honest woman can be seen alone
with d’Arcy. Leilah ought to know better.
She ought to know better too than to go to the
Ritz. As she does not appear to, I propose
to tell her.”</p>
<p>“Do as you like,” replied Silverstairs who
would have said the same thing no matter what
his wife had suggested. The lady had not entirely
Americanised this Englishman but she
had at least made him realise the futility of
argument.</p>
<p>“Do as you like,” he repeated. “There are
the Orlonnas. There are the Zubaroffs.”</p>
<p>At once to the quick click of an ouvreuse’s
key, the door opened and Tempest appeared,
a foulard showing above his coat.</p>
<p>While he removed these things Violet called
at him:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_194">[194]</a></span></p>
<p>“You’re late.”</p>
<p>Silverstairs laughed. “He always is. At
Christ Church he was known as the late Lord
Howard.”</p>
<p>Tempest moved forward and sat down between
them.</p>
<p>But now, to the volatile sweetmeats of the
score, the curtain was falling. In the stalls
there was a movement. Men stood up, put
their hats on, turned their back to the stage or
set forth for a chat with the vestals in the green
room.</p>
<p>Silverstairs also stood up.</p>
<p>Violet turned to him:</p>
<p>“I do wish you would look in on the Helley-Quetgens,
and ask Leilah to come to luncheon
to-morrow. Say I have a bone to pick with her.
That may fetch her, if nothing else will.”</p>
<p>Tempest ran a hand through his vivid hair.</p>
<p>“A bone over what, if I may ask? You
may not know it, but I greatly admire Madame
Barouffska.”</p>
<p>Violet smiled.</p>
<p>“She’s a dear. But I saw her to-day with
d’Arcy, and I propose to scold her for it.”</p>
<p>Tempest showed his teeth.</p>
<p>“D’Arcy is not a man’s man, though he
certainly is a woman’s. Yet, when you come
to that, not such a woman as Madame Barouffska.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_195">[195]</a></span>
What an odd thing that was about her
first husband!”</p>
<p>“You mean about the dogs?”</p>
<p>“Yes. I never got the rights of it. What
was he doing there? Is she living in the past?”</p>
<p>Violet raised her opera-glass.</p>
<p>“She would be very lucky if she could be;
living in the present is so expensive, don’t you
think?”</p>
<p>Again there was a quick click. The door
opened. Silverstairs, filling the entrance with
his tall stature, reappeared.</p>
<p>“Violet,” he began, “the Helley-Quetgens
are going on to some dance in the Faubourg,
and Leilah wants the three of us to sup with
her at Paillard’s. What do you say?”</p>
<p>Violet laughed. “I say it will be just my
chance.” She turned to Tempest. “You will
come?”</p>
<p>“Thanks, yes. Isn’t that de Fresnoy with
the Zubaroffs?”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, without sitting down, raised his
glass.</p>
<p>“Yes, and I was just saying, this is the first
time since his duel that I have seen him. But
what an asinine affair that was! He lunged at
Barouffski’s neck, Barouffski knocked the foil
up and pricked himself on the chin with it.
Then Barouffski’s surgeon stopped the fight on<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_196">[196]</a></span>
the ground that it might interfere with his
breathing. Fancy that! Afterward, in the account
given to the press, the surgeon described
the prick as an incisive wound in the hyoïdian
region, accompanied by a notable flow of
blood. Anyone who did not know would have
thought that Barouffski had been nearly done
for. But that’s a French duel for you—a
funeral at which everybody giggles.”</p>
<p>Tempest looked gravely up at his friend.
“What did you have for dinner?”</p>
<p>Suspiciously, Silverstairs considered him.</p>
<p>“Why do you ask?”</p>
<p>“You are so expansive and brilliant.”</p>
<p>On the stage, the drama continued, poignantly,
beatifically, in a unison of violins and
voices that was interrupted at last by the usual
stir in the stalls and boxes, by the haste to be
going, to be elsewhere, and a defile began; a
procession of silken robes, gorgeous cloaks,
jeweled headgear, black coats, white ties; a
procession that presently filled the subscribers’
rotunda, from which, at sight of it, grooms
fled, then hurried back, touching their hats,
eager and zealous.</p>
<p>Between the columns groups loitered, regarding
each other with indulgence, with indifference,
at times with a loftiness that put
isolating zones about them; and women assumed<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_197">[197]</a></span>
that attitude which women alone can
assume, that attitude of being not only apart
from the crowd, but of being unaware of the
crowd’s existence.</p>
<p>In the centre, Mme. Orlonna, an Italian
princess, with a slight moustache and an
ancestry that extended to the super-Neronian
days of Heliogabalus, stood, laughing
and talking, lisping <i>Bonthoirs</i> to
everybody.</p>
<p>Another princess, a Russian, Mme. Zubaroff,
with a young girl at her side, and an escort
of blond giants, passed, inclining her head to
the left, to the right, bowing with a grace mechanical,
but sovereign.</p>
<p>Beyond, Leilah appeared, d’Arcy on one
side, Barouffski on the other. Her face, ordinarily
pale, was flushed, and her manner,
usually subdued, was animated. She was
laughing, not loudly, but noticeably.</p>
<p>Violet, accompanied by Tempest and Silverstairs,
approached. As the men, after saluting
the women, greeted each other, Violet tapped
Leilah with her fan.</p>
<p>“My dear, I have a bone to pick with you.”</p>
<p>Leilah, with a levity that was rare with her,
interrupted:</p>
<p>“It is just for that we are going to supper.
How will you have it, grilled or deviled?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_198">[198]</a></span></p>
<p>“Her ladyship’s carriage is at the door,” a
groom announced, in English.</p>
<p>Another added, in French: “The motor of
madame la comtesse is advanced.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Violet retorted. “But my bone belongs
to a different kettle of fish. Now, you
come with me.” With a smile, she turned to
the others. “We will go in the brougham, and
you take the motor.”</p>
<p>Stooping, she lifted her train, and the two
women, accompanied by the men, followed the
groom to the carriage.</p>
<p>There, after seeing them in, Barouffski
called:</p>
<p>“To Paillard’s, Chaussée d’Antin.”</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_199">[199]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="XII">XII</a></h2>
<p>At the glass door, which a chasseur opened,
Barouffski stopped, spoke to the man, gave
him an order. As the others, conducted by a
maître d’hôtel, approached a table, a fat woman
in a pulpit charged them, before they
were seated, with the use of the silver and the
cloth.</p>
<p>Beyond, a band of Bohemians, costumed in
crimson, were loosing, with nervous and dirty
fingers, whirlwinds of notes. The atmosphere,
filled with vibrations, fevered by the fury of
the violins, dripped with the scent of flowers,
with the bouquet of burgundies, the smell of
champagne, the odour of tobacco and food.</p>
<p>At adjacent tables were demi-reps and
foreigners, mondaines and clubmen, a sprinkle
of the cream of the venal, the exotic and the
ultra-chic, whom omnibuses and waiters,
marshaled by maîtres d’hôtel, served with the
same deference and zeal.</p>
<p>For the Barouffski party, these latter had
turned two tables into one, at which Violet
Silverstairs occupied one end, Leilah the other.
Violet had Barouffski at her right, Tempest at<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_200">[200]</a></span>
her left, while Leilah had Silverstairs at her
left and d’Arcy at her right, a disposition
natural enough and otherwise fortuitous which
placed Tempest next to d’Arcy, with Barouffski
and Silverstairs opposite.</p>
<p>In the rising storm of the music, Leilah
turned to d’Arcy. What she was saying the
others could not hear and all, save Silverstairs,
who was munching a hors d’œuvre, addressed
themselves to Violet.</p>
<p>Presently, in a lull of the gale, Tempest
would have tried to talk to this woman who, in
abandoning her Madonna air had now the
merit of suggesting both the Chimera and the
Sphinx, but something in her attitude to
d’Arcy prevented. It was not, to employ a
vulgarism, that she was making eyes at the
man, but she was obviously permitting him to
make eyes at her.</p>
<p>D’Arcy was seated, his arms on the table,
talking in her face. His plate was empty. A
chaudfroid had been served. He had refused
it. A mousse had followed. He had refused
that also. Over the glasses at his side he had
put a hand. It seemed a pose of his not to eat
or to drink that he might do nothing but
talk.</p>
<p>Leilah herself had not eaten. But as soon
as champagne was served she had drunk of it,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_201">[201]</a></span>
she had drunk since and in her manner, in the
way she held herself, in the inflection of her
voice, there had entered a trace of the excessive
which the mondaine avoids. It was this that
had deterred Tempest. Moreover she had been
laughing and that surprised Violet who, except
a little earlier in the rotunda, never, since
Leilah reached Paris, had seen her laugh before.</p>
<p>Now, her head drawn back, her eyes half
closed, she was gratifying d’Arcy with that
look with which a woman can appear not to
listen merely but to drink the words, the appearance
even, of the man by whom she is addressed.
While perhaps flattering to him, it
was too marked for good taste. The others
noticed it, but, as is usual in such circumstances,
they acted as though they had not.</p>
<p>Barouffski conscious of the impression produced,
conscious also of the impressions of
the afternoon, leaned forward and said in
French:</p>
<p>“But, my dear! You eat nothing!”</p>
<p>Silverstairs, tugging at his moustache,
laughed inanely and addressing himself to
both Leilah and d’Arcy, threw in:</p>
<p>“If this is a private conversation——”</p>
<p>“What nonsense!” Leilah threw back.</p>
<p>“I was about to say,” Silverstairs resumed,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_202">[202]</a></span>
“that if it is a private conversation, I’d like to
hear it. If it is not, never mind.”</p>
<p>Barouffski, still leaning forward, continued:</p>
<p>“I pray you take a bit of the chaudfroid.”</p>
<p>With a movement of impatience, yet otherwise
ignoring him completely, Leilah turned
again to d’Arcy.</p>
<p>Barouffski was not in a mood to be ignored.
The sight of d’Arcy in the afternoon, the man’s
unawaited advent at the Opéra, his demeanour
to Leilah, her attitude to him, the hazards
which both seemed to suggest; yet chiefly the
precariousness of his own position, the constant
effort to appear other than what he was,
the consciousness of danger ever present, the
obligation to cover irritation with calm, anxiety
with banter, these things and the tension
of them, fevered and enraged. At the moment
he felt like a fiend and looked it. A moment
only. Reacting at once, he compressed his
lips, parted them and summoning his ambiguous
smile, called out:</p>
<p>“If the chaudfroid says nothing to you, will
you not try the mousse?”</p>
<p>Leilah was raising a glass to her lips. She
looked over it at him and, much as though he
were a servant, said:</p>
<p>“Do me the favour to attend to your own
affairs.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_203">[203]</a></span></p>
<p>Barouffski’s smile evaporated. A man with
no sense of honour and some sense of humour
may go far, provided that he keep his temper.
Barouffski knew it but forgot it. With a tone
of authority which in the rue de la Pompe he
would have ordinarily avoided, angrily he
replied:</p>
<p>“Then do me the favour not to drink any
more.”</p>
<p>Leilah, the glass at her lips, paused, looked
over it again, and very gently, almost sweetly,
with the pretty air of a spoiled child, nodded
at him.</p>
<p>“Only one sip.”</p>
<p>She touched the glass with her lips, for a
moment held it there, then, offering it to
d’Arcy, rather languorously she said:</p>
<p>“Beau sire, will you drink the rest?”</p>
<p>Instantly Violet intervened. “Leilah! Behave
yourself!”</p>
<p>“But with delight,” d’Arcy was saying.</p>
<p>From Leilah’s extended hand he took the
glass, raised it, drained it, put it down, looked
at her.</p>
<p>Barouffski was looking at him. Quietly,
without emphasis, he asked:</p>
<p>“Will you drink mine, too?”</p>
<p>Half rising as he spoke, he had taken his
own glass in his hand and with a gesture<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_204">[204]</a></span>
which, even as he made it, he regretted, a gesture
incited by vibrations which he was unable
to resist, he flung the contents at him.</p>
<p>“Barouffski!” Violet indignantly exclaimed.</p>
<p>She glanced about her. At her elbow an
omnibus, a lad undersized but stout, stood
gaping. Beyond, the Bohemians were storming.
At the adjacent table were demi-reps
and South Americans. They had not noticed.
At this table, Tempest, his teeth visible, was
contemplating his host. Silverstairs, tugging
at his moustache, was considering Leilah. The
latter was looking—and with what a look!—at
Barouffski. But no one spoke. A spell
seemed to have settled on all. With the idea
of doing or of saying something that would
break it, Violet turned to d’Arcy.</p>
<p>Delicately, with a coroneted handkerchief,
he had wiped his face and was then mopping
at his shirt.</p>
<p>Interrupting the operation, he looked up
and laughed. “Oh, la, la! The dangers that
may be avoided in remaining at home! These
are the accidents of restaurant life!”</p>
<p>He laughed again. The laugh humanised
and deformed the Pheidian beauty of his face.
He bowed to Leilah, bowed to Violet and collectively
added:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_205">[205]</a></span></p>
<p>“Mesdames, I have ceased to be presentable.
A thousand pardons. You will permit
me?”</p>
<p>In a moment, after another bow, circular
this time, a bow which while managing to
omit Barouffski, included the rest of the table,
he had gone.</p>
<p>“He looks like Keats,” said Silverstairs animated
by an unconscious desire to second his
wife and break the spell which still persisted.
Ordinarily he would have taken her and gone.
The assault had been as much of an affront to
her as it had been to d’Arcy. But to have left
the table would have been a reproof to Leilah,
whom, in the ridiculous way in which society
is organized, he was unable to disassociate
from Barouffski.</p>
<p>“Keats!” Tempest, coming to his aid, exclaimed.
“I’ll lay a guinea you would not
know his picture if you saw it.”</p>
<p>Amiably Silverstairs tugged at his moustache.
“Well, perhaps not. What I meant
was that he looks like a poet.”</p>
<p>“I don’t agree with you,” Tempest retorted.
“To begin with, there are not any. Besides,
latterly there have been but two—Hugo, who
looked like a green-grocer, and Swinburne
who looked like a bookseller’s assistant. Moreover
I hate poets, though, as someone said<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_206">[206]</a></span>
somewhere, an inability to write in verse can
hardly be regarded as constituting a special
talent. No, d’Arcy does not look like a poet,
he looks like a poet’s creation.”</p>
<p>“Excuse me,” Silverstairs with affected
meekness threw out. “And thanks for the lecture.”</p>
<p>Tempest nodded. “You’re entirely welcome.”</p>
<p>He turned to Violet. She was looking at
Leilah who was looking at Barouffski. The
latter was looking at the fingers of his right
hand against which his thumb passed and repassed
mechanically. But now, aroused from
his reflections by the entire cessation of talk,
he glanced about him, summoned a waiter,
settled the score. The Bohemians who momentarily
had been silent, abruptly striped
the air with spangles from their bows.</p>
<p>Violet and Leilah stood up, resumed their
wraps, passed on. The men, buttoning their
coats, putting their gloves on, followed.</p>
<p>At the door were the eager grooms. As one
of them touched his hat to Leilah, Violet
turned to her.</p>
<p>“My dear, I cannot thank you for a very
pleasant evening. But I will look in on you
to-morrow. That bone isn’t picked and what’s
more, now I’ve got sauce for it.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_207">[207]</a></span></p>
<p>With Silverstairs and Tempest at her heels,
she went to her brougham. Leilah entered the
motor.</p>
<p>At the door of the latter Barouffski stood.
He raised his hat. Leilah looked at him. She
had had, she thought, her last glimpse of the
world and this was her last glimpse of him.
The sight was so repugnant that she almost
sickened and the nausea which she felt, her
face expressed.</p>
<p>Barouffski tried to smile but the unconcealed
candour of her abhorrence made his
lips twitch. Now, though, the motor was
starting. As it whirred away, he drew his
coat closely about him, turned up the collar
and stuck his hands deep in the pockets.
There had come to him that odd sensation
which homely fancy attributes to someone
walking on your grave.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_208">[208]</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_209">[209]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2> <a id="XIII">XIII</a></h2>
<p>The next day, Violet, entering the brilliant
room, gazed first about it and then at Leilah.</p>
<p>“Aurelia is not here? That’s odd. She is
simply horrid but so reliable. You don’t
mind my having told her to meet me?”</p>
<p>Leilah sighed. “I am getting so that soon
I shan’t mind anything.”</p>
<p>Violet, seating herself, nodded vivaciously.</p>
<p>“I call that very fine. But there is something
finer. Never mind anybody. Silverstairs
now——” and as the lady spoke she
summoned a smile feline and Cheshire—“he
fancied I would be a good, obedient little wife.
Instead of which he is a good, obedient big
husband.” In entire self-appreciation she exhibited
the tip of her tongue and moistened
her lips with it. “It takes us, doesn’t it? But
forgive me, dear, us is perhaps an exaggeration.
I am afraid you have made rather a
mess of things. Now what are you going
to do?”</p>
<p>Without replying, Leilah looked away.
During the night she had barely slept. The
incident in the restaurant, events that had preceded<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_210">[210]</a></span>
it, anterior complications, subsequent
developments, these things, like the Bohemians
at Paillard’s, had stormed at her, attacked her
fibres, wrenched her nerves, striating the darkness
of her room with variations on the tragedy
of her life.</p>
<p>In what manner the affair in the restaurant
had terminated, she had no one to inform her
but she could readily fancy that shortly d’Arcy
and Barouffski would go somewhere and fight,
or pretend to, and then return, none the worse
and none the better, but with honour satisfied
and their names in print.</p>
<p>The entire episode was shameful. But
though provoked by her she had not premeditated
it. In offering d’Arcy her glass, she had
wished solely to display her independence.
Subsequently, in going over the matter, she
had realised that the wish, while human, had
not been nice. Then, a bit conscience-stricken,
she had wondered how she could have behaved
as she had.</p>
<p>“I did it without thinking,” was her immediate
excuse. But that, she told herself was
untrue. Ever since the duel and the blow and
the nightmare that followed, some such wish
had been fermenting in her. The wish, reasonable
in itself, though in her case unreasoned,
persisted, as in certain natures a wish<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_211">[211]</a></span>
will persist, until, after the fashion of a constantly
recurring idea, the individual becomes
so saturated with it that, given the impulse,
given less than that, given a vibration, some
effect, perhaps wholly atmospheric, and suddenly
the idea has solidified into an act, an
act noble, degrading or merely banal, according
to the influence that produced it, but
an act which, whatever its character, has then
become inevitable, even involuntary, its constant
mental recurrence having exhausted the
ability to choose between it and another.</p>
<p>Leilah had thought of this and, in search of
comfort, had groped for another excuse. As
an Oriental will say: “My body is tired.”
“My body is hungry,” so Leilah decided: “It
was my nerves that did it.”</p>
<p>But the sophistry displeased her. She
knew that she had judged and condemned Barouffski
and she knew also that she had no
right to do either. The man was clearly a
cad, a scoundrel and a brute, yet even though
he were these things and worse and more besides,
he so became in her eyes merely because
her consciousness had evolved to a point
higher than his own. Seen from a different
angle, she might appear only a shade less
reprehensible, and it might be, even equally
vile. Moreover, according to the <cite>Upanishads</cite>,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_212">[212]</a></span>
this consciousness of hers and that consciousness
of his were fundamentally one. Both had
come from the same source. To that source
both would ultimately return. They would
be fused there, as originally there they had
been merged.</p>
<p>At the apperception of that, the curious
lines which occur in the <cite>Book of Dzyan</cite> suggested
themselves:</p>
<p>“<i>Said the Flame to the Spark: ‘I have
clothed myself in thee, thou art my image, my
body, until that day when thou shalt rebecome
myself and others, thyself and me.’</i>”</p>
<p>In the penetrating beauty of the allegory
Leilah told herself that she, Barouffski, Verplank,
the Silverstairs, the Helley-Quetgens,
everybody whom she knew, everyone whom
she did not know, all the fillers of space, were
sparks of one Flame, the Flame from which
they had been formerly emitted and into
which they would finally return. That, she
felt she must believe, if she were to believe
anything. But she felt too that though she
did believe it, she believed also that for the
present there were sparks better parted than
united, as there were also others better united
than apart.</p>
<p>On the table before her was a treatise on the
Paramitas—which are The Blessed Things.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_213">[213]</a></span>
She looked at it, knowing that what she had
done was wrong and what she was about to do
was evil. But she felt also that she could not
help herself. Whatever the penalty, it was
impossible for her to live with Barouffski.
Whatever the punishment, it was impossible
for her not to live with Verplank. At the moment
it seemed to her as though the high
fates had set her in a circle from which she
could not escape except by the door of death
or that of further sinning. At this idea she
wondered about Barouffski as, after Verplank’s
eruption at the Joyeuses, she had
wondered about him. She wondered whether
in some former existence she had injured Barouffski
and whether it were for that reason
that she had been led into giving him the
power to injure her now. It might be so, she
told herself, in which case she ought to bear it.
But how could she know that it was so? Yet
even though it were and the fact were made
clear to her, even then, even too if the certainty
of a punishment more poignant than
any were shaken in her eyes, still she could not
bear it.</p>
<p>“But I ought to,” she found herself saying.</p>
<p>These reflections Violet’s advent had interrupted.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_214">[214]</a></span></p>
<p>“What are you going to do?” the lady was
asking.</p>
<p>Leilah, unfit at the moment for battle, felt
unable to tell. She looked away.</p>
<p>“Nothing, I suppose.”</p>
<p>Violet, cocking a belligerent eye, threw out:</p>
<p>“You carry moderation to excess.”</p>
<p>Leilah looked up. “What would you have
me do?”</p>
<p>“Divorce Barouffski.”</p>
<p>“Because he threw champagne about? I
hardly fancy I could get a divorce for that.”</p>
<p>Militantly Violet whipped off a glove.
“Frankly that creature is a criminal. Never,
in all my life, have I seen such an exhibition
of bad taste. But then, as they say here, bad
taste leads to crime—to such vulgar forms of
it at that.”</p>
<p>“Even so, I don’t see how it helps me.”</p>
<p>“But he struck you,” Violet, more bellicose
than ever, exclaimed. “You told me so.
What more would you have. But aren’t you
difficile to-day!” Suspiciously she considered
her friend. “You’ve got something up your
sleeve.”</p>
<p>“If I have,” Leilah, in an effort to parry the
thrust, replied, “at least it is not witnesses.”</p>
<p>Cogently Violet nodded. “Come to me
then. Divorce is the mother-in-law of invention.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_215">[215]</a></span>
If you haven’t any witnesses, I’ll find
something else. I make a specialty of finding
things before they are lost.”</p>
<p>This programme hardly suited Leilah’s
book. Again she parried. “Last night—and
what a night!—I dreamed I was feasting with
the dead. It was so peaceful. It is that that I
want. It is peace the very fibres of my being
crave.”</p>
<p>Here were heights—or depths—where Violet
could not follow. With a smile she tacked.</p>
<p>“Before you dreamed your dream I noticed
that you wore a very ducky frock.”</p>
<p>“It is stained. So am I. The champagne
Barouffski threw stained me within and without.”</p>
<p>Here were other heights. Readily Violet
skirted them.</p>
<p>“I believe I got a drop or two myself. But
then I don’t mind. It is true I am not a
theosophist.”</p>
<p>At this, in indignation at herself, Leilah protested.</p>
<p>“Theosophy is primarily a school of good
manners. In giving d’Arcy my glass, mine
were detestable.”</p>
<p>Now they were on surer ground. Wickedly
Violet winked.</p>
<p>“Nobody has any manners any more or,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_216">[216]</a></span>
when they do, they have them in plenty and
all of them bad.”</p>
<p>“If I have an excuse,” Leilah continued, “it
is that Gulian drove me nearly demented.”</p>
<p>Now, Violet felt, they were getting at it.
Mentally she girded herself and with an engaging
appearance of sympathy, exclaimed:</p>
<p>“A man never does that unless he loves a
woman to distraction.”</p>
<p>The sympathy, however feigned, did its
work. After all, Leilah reflected, why should
she not tell what she was about to do? On
the impulse she turned.</p>
<p>“Violet, I offered Barouffski half my fortune
to free me. His reply was a blow. Apart
from that I have no grounds for a divorce,
none at least which I can show. Previously
there was something between Gulian and me.
It has gone. He cares for me still and I care
for him. Shortly he is to be here. For a long
time I hesitated. But after last night—after
the nights and days that preceded it!—it does
not seem to me that I need hesitate any more.”</p>
<p>Pausing, she drew breath. “Violet, when
he comes I am to go with him. Is there a
reason why I should not?”</p>
<p>Violet, who had long suspected as much,
now at last had nailed it. Cautiously she
buckled to.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_217">[217]</a></span></p>
<p>“No. Not one. On the contrary. There
is every reason why you should. Every reason.
Particularly as to greet you there will be
the disdainful eyes, the lifted skirts, the
averted heads, every one of the very slight and
very fiendish tortures that are visited on the
woman who has gone and done it.”</p>
<p>For a second she too paused, then with a war
whoop added:</p>
<p>“But you can’t do anything of the kind. I
won’t let you.”</p>
<p>“Would you turn from me also?”</p>
<p>“I! Merciful fathers! But I am not the
world. No matter what is done in private,
the world does not care. The world is very
well bred. It never sees anything that was not
intended for it. But on the open scandal of
scandalous conduct instantly it turns its well
bred back. It will turn it on you.”</p>
<p>Indifferently Leilah assented. She had examined
this phase of the matter. It had not
seemed very important.</p>
<p>“No doubt,” she replied. “Yet then destiny
seldom closes a door without opening another.
I told you of my dream. It was a dream of
peace. Here there can be none. It may be
my karma perhaps. But this,” she continued,
motioning at the brilliant room, “this is my
prison.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_218">[218]</a></span></p>
<p>She hesitated and a bit lamely concluded:</p>
<p>“It is horrible to be in such a place.”</p>
<p>“And worse to be nowhere at all,” Violet
shot at her. In firing she had sat up. Now,
lolling back on the cushions, she enigmatically
resumed: “You may be right though. I daresay
it is dreadful to be in prison. I daresay it
is even worse than you think.”</p>
<p>Enigmatic still, she smiled. With another
shot, with two at most, Leilah, she told herself,
would be routed.</p>
<p>“It is as though I were in a vortex,” the
latter was saying. “It is as though I were
being torn from places where I do not wish
to be to others I may not like. But can one
argue with a vortex? It is idle even to struggle.
Whether you will or you won’t, you have
to let yourself go.”</p>
<p>Lightly, in her most worldly manner, Violet
laughed.</p>
<p>“Never in the world! A woman should
never let herself go—except in an aeroplane.
At a pinch a four-in-hand might do, but——”</p>
<p>At the moment the lady was thoroughly <i lang="fr">en
veine</i> and, sure of victory, might have bantered
on, but this, Aurelia, ushered by Parker,
prevented.</p>
<p>Sharply Violet threw at her: “Where have
you been?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_219">[219]</a></span></p>
<p>Ignoring Violet, Aurelia nodded at Leilah.</p>
<p>“I was here the other day, did they tell
you?”</p>
<p>She turned and with blithe impertinence
looked her sister up and down.</p>
<p>“Don’t be so ordinary as to ask a girl
where she has been. If you are inquisitive,
ask where she is going, and, if you
ask me, I’ll tell you. I am going to
become——”</p>
<p>“Yes, yes.” Violet impatiently interrupted.
“We’ve heard all that. You’re going to become
a star. I know what kind too—a fallen
star.”</p>
<p>A fresher smile bubbled about Aurelia’s
delicious mouth.</p>
<p>“It pleases your ladyship to jest. I am to
become the Princess Farnese!”</p>
<p>“Merciful heavens!” Violet exclaimed, turning
as she spoke to Leilah. “She’ll go in to
dinner before me!”</p>
<p>But Leilah who, after a word of greeting to
Aurelia, had, from the table before her, taken
and reopened the Paramitas, perhaps did not
hear.</p>
<p>Violet turned again to her sister. “When
did he propose?”</p>
<p>With an air of amused contempt, again
Aurelia looked her up and down.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_220">[220]</a></span></p>
<p>“How antiquated you are! Don’t you know
that all that sort of thing has gone out?”</p>
<p>“Do you mean that he didn’t propose?”</p>
<p>“Of course not. I proposed to him.”</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“He was so coy about it, too,” Aurelia, quite
as though she were eating sweetmeats, resumed.
“He asked me all about my finances,
what settlements I would make and whether
I would object if he kept a separate establishment.
You can’t really fancy how coy he was.
He quite blushed and stammered, the poor
thing.”</p>
<p>“I should think he might.”</p>
<p>“Yes, indeed. He asked me if I had spoken
to his mamma, and I told him that while it
was perhaps incorrect of me to speak to him
in the first instance, yet that there could be
no real love without a mutual misunderstanding,
and now that we had one I would make
a formal demand of the old lady to-day.”</p>
<p>Aurelia, executing a little <i lang="fr">pas</i>, added: “I
have just seen her.”</p>
<p>“Well?”</p>
<p>“She said: ‘And so you want my little boy
for your husband.’ Partly that I told her,
but partly also I want you for mother-in-law.
You should have seen her lick her chops over
that. Then she asked me about my affections.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_221">[221]</a></span>
I told her they were just like the fashions.
They came and went.”</p>
<p>“She must have been delighted.”</p>
<p>“She hugged me. Then, of course, I asked
about him. She told me that he has just been
named as co-respondent in the Kincardine divorce
suit, and I said that that was perfectly
satisfactory.”</p>
<p>“What!”</p>
<p>“Perfectly satisfactory. It appears that
the poor boy can’t remember whether the
charge is true or false and that I think is so
dear of him.”</p>
<p>Violet, rising, extended her arms. “Aurelia,
I have been wrong, I have misjudged you.
Come to me.”</p>
<p>But Aurelia, moving back, waved her
away. “You’ll only muss me. Now I must
run. I must break the news to Parsnips. Will
you come, Vi?”</p>
<p>“In a moment.” Violet answered. “Wait
for me in the brougham. There is something
I want to say to Leilah.”</p>
<p>Endearingly the ingénue smiled. “Something
I ought not to hear, I suppose.” In
speaking she made for the door. “The amount
of things I ought not to hear and do hear is
simply amazing.”</p>
<p>As the portières fell on her gracile back,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_222">[222]</a></span>
Violet, with a gesture which, for so warlike a
lady, resembled defeat, reseating herself, exclaimed:</p>
<p>“Frankly, she is impossible.”</p>
<p>At once though, buckling anew for the fray,
she aimed at Leilah and fired.</p>
<p>“So are you.”</p>
<p>Leilah, who had been considering the Paramitas,
started at the attack which instantly was
followed up by another.</p>
<p>“Do you know anything about the code
here, the law code, I mean. Do you?”</p>
<p>Leilah, a bit bewildered, shook her head.
“No, that is, very little.”</p>
<p>Violet’s eyes fairly snapped. “I congratulate
you. A little is sometimes a great deal.
I also know a little and that little is, well, immense,
so enormous even that because of it
I am in a position to tell you that if you go with
Verplank, Barouffski can, if he catches you,
have you jailed.”</p>
<p>Gravely, with curious calm, Leilah looked at
her.</p>
<p>Annoyed that the shot had fallen short, Violet
aimed again.</p>
<p>“Didn’t you hear me? I said jailed.
J-a-i-l-e-d! Now I may add for two years.
That is what I meant when you spoke of your
prison. I agreed with you that it must be<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_223">[223]</a></span>
dreadful to be in one. I said I daresay it is
even worse than you think.”</p>
<p>Leilah half raised a hand. “But——”</p>
<p>Unheedingly Violet continued. “Now, as
for Verplank, if Barouffski were to surprise
him here with you he could kill you both, yes,
and be acquitted. But you—I have told you
what he can do. Moreover, if he so much as
suspects you, he can call the police. But excuse
me. You were saying?”</p>
<p>“Nothing of any moment.”</p>
<p>But Violet persisted. “What was it?”</p>
<p>“Merely that during the Terror a woman
went to the guillotine smelling a rose.”</p>
<p>At this flank movement Violet winced, but
she rallied.</p>
<p>“Yes and rehearsed the act beforehand.
They all did. The great ladies of the period
rehearsed for the guillotine that they might
die, as they had lived, with grace. Those were
the good old days. These are the bad new ones.
Anything of the kind would be ridiculous
now.”</p>
<p>To this, gravely as before, Leilah assented.
“No doubt. But aren’t you rather rambling
about the grounds? It seems to me that you
also have something up your sleeve.”</p>
<p>Violet rose to the challenge. “Something!
I have the entire pharmacopœia. In it is a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_224">[224]</a></span>
remedy heroic but sovereign. If you’ll take
it, it may maim but it will cure.”</p>
<p>Leilah, well entrenched, braved her. “I may
not need it.”</p>
<p>With a rush, then, the attack began.</p>
<p>“That’s because you don’t know. You think
you are sane and sound. Don’t you now? Yes,
and you are neither. You have a high temperature
complicated with nausea. The temperature
is due to exposure, the nausea to indigestion.
You have been exposed to Verplank
and you have supped on Barouffski.
You fancy you can’t be rid of the incubus.
That is an hallucination which the fever
has caused. You can be rid of it. You can
throw it up. I have an emetic that will do
the trick. It may not be tasty but I’ll warrant
it will make him gag far more than
you.”</p>
<p>At the ferocity of the assault, Leilah quailed.
“Really, Violet, your language——”</p>
<p>But the lady was not to be denied. “Aha! You
want me to be butter-fingered, don’t you? Not
a bit of it. You shall have the dose whether
you like it or not and here it is for you. You
called this place a prison. Now who runs it?
You do. And on what? Your money. Supposing
you hadn’t any? Would Barouffski
supply it? He would pack in a jiffy. Couldn’t<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_225">[225]</a></span>
you then sue for divorce? Of course you
could. Then there is the emetic. Verplank
has enough for you both, enough for an army.
All you have to do is to hold your nose, open
your mouth, give your money away and vomit
Barouffski. Will you?”</p>
<p>It was Violet’s last shot. With it she had
expected to bowl Leilah completely over.
Anxiously she looked to see the result.</p>
<p>“Will you?” she repeated.</p>
<p>With manifest exaltation Leilah answered:
“I had thought of it.”</p>
<p>Surprisedly Violet stared, wondering could
all her ammunition have gone for nothing,
wondering too at the almost rapt expression
that had come into Leilah’s face.</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“Yes, Violet, I had thought of it—and of
other things also. While Aurelia was here, I
was reading a little book. It told me what I
once knew and had since forgotten. It told
me that if we have ideals we should live for
them, that it is only by living for them and
suffering for them that we can lift ourselves
above the brutes. Violet, it was sinful of me
to think of going with Gulian.”</p>
<p>Dispassionately the now mollified lady
toned that phrase.</p>
<p>“It was not perhaps quite nice.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_226">[226]</a></span></p>
<p>“But I had not seen,” Leilah continued.
“No, not that,” she interrupted herself to explain.
“I had forgotten that this prison, all I
have endured, all I shall endure, these are my
debts to the Lords of Karma.”</p>
<p>But that was a bit too strong. Violet
laughed.</p>
<p>“You mean the Lords of Gammon.”</p>
<p>“I mean,” Leilah, with heightening fervour,
replied, “that I have looked upon my prison
as a cross. It is not a cross, it is a boon—one
of which I have not been worthy. For I forgot
that any sorrow should be welcomed. I
forgot that it has been sent to make us nobler
than we are. But my sorrows I have not welcomed.
I have rebelled against them. I shall
rebel no more. They were my masters. They
shall be my servants now.”</p>
<p>At these fine sentiments Violet sniffed.</p>
<p>“If that is theosophy I will believe in it
when I am old, fat and a German. But I am
glad it enabled you to reach a decision. Otherwise——”</p>
<p>But what the lady may have intended to
say was never expressed or at least not then.
Through the yellow portières, the delicate oval
of Aurelia’s face appeared.</p>
<p>“Aren’t you ever coming?” she called.
“What have you two been talking about?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_227">[227]</a></span></p>
<p>As the ingénue spoke, she entered, strolled
to the mirror, considered herself.</p>
<p>“We have been discussing your engagement,”
Violet, in a very matter of fact way, replied.</p>
<p>Aurelia adjusted her hat, patted her hair,
and addressed the mirror.</p>
<p>“I fancied it must be something important.
Did I tell you what happened before I took
Farnese?”</p>
<p>Violet yawned. “I have forgotten.”</p>
<p>Aurelia, still pluming herself, smiled.</p>
<p>“Then I didn’t. Besides, it is so shocking.”</p>
<p>Violet motioned at her. “Don’t be tiresome.
I may have lost the ability to be shocked but
not the ability to be bored.”</p>
<p>With an air of great satisfaction Aurelia
turned.</p>
<p>“Well, this morning, d’Arcy called. He told
me about the gayeties last evening and it
seemed to me that he must have looked so sweet
with the champagne all over him that I could
hardly resist accepting him, too.”</p>
<p>“Accepting him, three!” Violet exclaimed.
She raised her eyes as though calling heaven
to witness. “There’s constancy for you!”</p>
<p>Aurelia gave another glance at her enticing
self.</p>
<p>“Do you know, I have always thought that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_228">[228]</a></span>
constancy must be due either to a lack of imagination
or else of opportunity. That is what
you would call a moral standpoint, isn’t it?
Though what morality itself is you never
deigned to explain. Personally I am inclined
to think that it must be a preference in a
choice of experiences.”</p>
<p>Violet stood up. “One might suppose you
thought it consisted in being engaged to half
a dozen men at the same time.”</p>
<p>Enthusiastically the girl regarded her.
“There! That’s it! You’ve struck it! There
is safety in numbers and what a moral young
person I am!”</p>
<p>Violet nodded. “I never suspected it before.”</p>
<p>“Nor I,” Aurelia contentedly replied. She
looked at Leilah. “By-by.”</p>
<p>“Good-by,” Violet added.</p>
<p>In a moment both had gone and Leilah,
again alone, reopened the little treatise on the
Paramitas.</p>
<p>The way was now clear and to that way the
pamphlet had pointed. It had done more. It
had brought the exaltation which such beatitudes
do bring to those in great distress. But
though it had exalted, suddenly the fervour fell
from her, for at once she foresaw the scene
which she would have with Verplank, when<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_229">[229]</a></span>
now, at the last moment, she had to tell him
that she could not go. The terror of it daunted
her. She could see him, demanding that she
tell him why—that faltering why of hers
which would be gibberish to him and yet
which summarised her ideals.</p>
<p>For the moment she felt that she lacked
the strength for this, that it would be better to
write him and she was thinking what she
would say and how she would say it, when
something external, a noise from without, distracted
her.</p>
<p>She stood up and went to the window, from
which, since the day of the ambuscade, she
had had no heart to look.</p>
<p>Below, a footman in a canary coat and black
knee-breeches was walking, bareheaded,
straight on. At the gate he stopped, fumbled
with the latch, drew back the door, held it
open.</p>
<p>A man entered. Tall and broad-shouldered,
he had a rigid face, calm eyes, the air of a
judge. His beard, intensely black, the beard of
a Saracen, was close cut and pointed. He was
dressed in black.</p>
<p>Another man followed. Shorter, fairer, distinctly
fat, he had a box under his arm. About
the box were broad bands, sealed with red wax.</p>
<p>A third man appeared. Older than the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_230">[230]</a></span>
others, he had gray hair, glasses rimmed with
tortoise-shell, and a bag.</p>
<p>All three were in black, all were grave, all
were silent, and as they stood before the gate
they partially concealed a fourth man, who, in
black also, wore white gloves.</p>
<p>What they had come for Leilah could not
imagine. Then, at once, she recalled what
Violet had said: the rigors of French justice, a
husband’s ability to cage an erring wife, to put
her away, indefinitely, among the demented
and the depraved, and at the sight of these
men, at the thought of the Byzantine abysses
of Barouffski’s nature, abysses perhaps unsounded
yet, dread shook her. She shuddered.</p>
<p>But now another procession appeared, one
that issued not from the gate, but from the
house, a procession also composed of four men,
also grave, also silent. One of them she vaguely
recalled, and her stumbling memory tried to
put a name on him, Dal, Mal, Pal-Palencia!
Another, too, she remembered, Tyszkiewicz. A
third also, and, to her cost, she knew. It was
Barouffski.</p>
<p>In the first procession there was now a fourth
acquaintance. The man with white gloves was
raising his hat. As he did so she recognised
d’Arcy. Then at last she understood, and,
lest they should see her, drew back.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_231">[231]</a></span></p>
<p>Meanwhile the footman had disappeared.
From the first procession the man with the
umbrella and the man with the box detached
themselves. From the second, Palencia and
Tyszkiewicz advanced.</p>
<p>For a little, grouped together, they conversed
inaudibly, but amply with gestures and
movements that included the tossing of a coin.</p>
<p>A pantomime followed. Tyszkiewicz, Palencia
and the fat man moved to one side. The
man with the umbrella drew with the ferule of
it a line on the ground. Then, his head bent,
one foot put directly in front of the other, he
walked slowly until he had covered a space
equal apparently to about fifteen yards. There
he drew a second line, straightened himself,
turned to Barouffski, who went to that line,
while d’Arcy stationed himself at the other.</p>
<p>Immediately the fat man handed his box to
Palencia. Palencia looked at the seals, broke
them, opened the box, and, going to where
d’Arcy stood, presented it. D’Arcy removed a
glove, removed his hat, which he put brim upward
beside him, and taking a pistol from the
box, pointed it at the ground.</p>
<p>Palencia went back, restored the box to the
fat man, who presented it to Barouffski. Another
pistol was extracted. The fat man
moved to one side. The man with the umbrella<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_232">[232]</a></span>
placed himself at an angle to d’Arcy and
Barouffski. In front of him, at an equal angle,
Palencia, Tyszkiewicz and the fat man stood.
These the old man with the bag and the fourth
member of the Barouffski party joined. The
man with the umbrella took out a watch, and
held it open in his hand.</p>
<p>“Attention!”</p>
<p>The pantomime had ended. Leilah leaned
forward. Of Barouffski she could see now but
the back of his head, the back of his tight-fitting
coat. But d’Arcy, who stood sideways, his
heels drawn together, might have been posing
for a photograph.</p>
<p>The sky was leaden. The shrubbery resembled
it. From behind an urn a cat appeared.
It meowed and vanished. For a
moment more there was silence.</p>
<p>The man with the umbrella looked from
d’Arcy to Barouffski.</p>
<p>“Messieurs, after I give the command Fire,
I will count from one to ten, leaving between
each number an interval of ten seconds. It is
unnecessary, but it is my duty to add, that to
fire before I have given the word, or after I
have counted ten, constitutes attempted assassination
and, should death ensue, murder.”</p>
<p>He paused, looked at his watch, looked at
d’Arcy, again at Barouffski.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_233">[233]</a></span></p>
<p>“Fire!”</p>
<p>Simultaneously the two men raised and extended
their right arms, d’Arcy in such a
manner that the forearm and butt of the pistol
masked the abnormal beauty of his face. The
hand was bare, but the left, which hung at his
side, was gloved.</p>
<p>“One! Two! Three!”</p>
<p>With the ridiculous noise of a firecracker a
pistol went off. D’Arcy, lowering his right
hand, raised and shook the left. The delicate
material of the glove had reddened, and on the
ground specks of crimson dropped.</p>
<p>“Four! Five!”</p>
<p>D’Arcy’s left hand fell back. He raised the
right.</p>
<p>“Six! Seven! Eight!”</p>
<p>Measuredly, monotonously, but more loudly
than before, the final numbers were being
called. Infinitesimally the point of d’Arcy’s
pistol moved. His heels were no longer drawn
together. His right hand was held less high.
His left hand burned. Otherwise he was entirely
at his ease.</p>
<p>He had withstood Barouffski’s fire. It was
Barouffski’s turn to withstand his. He had
time and to spare. Slowly, coolly, deliberately,
he was taking aim.</p>
<p>It was very agreeable. He was smiling. He<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_234">[234]</a></span>
was enjoying himself. He was enjoying Barouffski’s
presumable suspense. He was
savouring his equally presumable agitations.
The man’s face had turned ashen. The fact
that it had, that he could see it had, delighted
him. He felt sure of himself, and his thoughts
were pleasant.</p>
<p>He was thinking: “That glass of wine of
yours was the last you will ever ask me or any
one else to drink.”</p>
<p>He had become aware of Leilah’s presence.
That, too, delighted him. If he had a regret,
it was that Tempest, the Silverstairs, all the
demi-mondaines and exotics of the night before,
the Bohemians to boot, the waiters
as well, were not present also. Though
in appearance divine, at heart he was
human.</p>
<p>Again, imperceptibly, the point of his pistol
moved.</p>
<p>“Nine!”</p>
<p>The trigger had been pulled. There was a
fresh detonation. D’Arcy handed his pistol
to the fat man, bent over, took up his hat, put
it on, took it off, raised it straight upward, and
for a moment, before replacing it, held it high
in the air.</p>
<p>Leilah, without noticing the salute which
was intended for her, saw Barouffski turn completely<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_235">[235]</a></span>
around, sink on his knees, press his
hands to his side, and pitch forward.</p>
<p>It was a feint, she thought, histrionics for
the gallery, perhaps for her. But now the old
man and his colleague were bending over him.
Behind them, Palencia, Tyszkiewicz and the
man with the umbrella leaned. Barouffski’s
coat and waistcoat were opened, his shirt was
torn apart.</p>
<p>Leilah heard what to her was the meaninglessness
of technical terms. She saw the men
who had been bending arise. She saw the
others remove their hats. At the significant
action she saw that the garden had been again
invaded, this time by Death.</p>
<p>She turned, clutching for support at the velvet
of a curtain, overwhelmed at the knowledge
that her prison had crumbled, that the
jailer was gone.</p>
<p>It had been her destiny to have sorrow spring
into her life, fell her, make her its own, and to
what end? Tearfully she had put that query
to walls as callous as fate. Tearfully she had
come to believe that she was damned in this
existence for sins committed in another. It is
this life that is hell she had told herself. But
now, abruptly, the malediction was lifted.
Still in hell, she was at the portals, the gates
were open, she was free!</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_236">[236]</a></span></p>
<p>Yet was she? At the moment it seemed to
her that it was all a hallucination; that, if she
looked again into the accursed garden, she
would see Barouffski tapping his breast with
one hand, pointing to some prostrate form
with the other, and, with his ambiguous smile,
calling to her:</p>
<p>“See, my dear, I, I am unharmed.”</p>
<p>So poignant was the impression that she did
look. A litter had been improvised, and on it
Barouffski, an arm pendent, his head fallen
back, his face a gray green, was being put.</p>
<p>On the door behind her sounded the muffled
tap of fingers furtive and discreet. She
turned. At the threshold was Parker.</p>
<p>“If you please, my lady. Will your ladyship
receive——”</p>
<p>“No,” Leilah answered. She was about to
add that she was at home to no one. But she
caught herself. “Who is it?”</p>
<p>With that air which those acquire who attend
to delicate matters, the woman answered:
“Mr. Verplank.”</p>
<p>Leilah drew a long breath. She went to the
mirror. The curtain had disarranged her hair.
She readjusted it, and passed out and down into
the slippery salon.</p>
<p>Verplank was leaning against the piano.
His left arm was in a sling, and the left side<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_237">[237]</a></span>
of his face from the nose to the ear was
bandaged.</p>
<p>Before either could speak there came from
the hall a murmur of voices, the sound of
lumbering feet, the noise of people labouring
upward.</p>
<p>Verplank looked at Leilah, and from her to
the door.</p>
<p>“What is that?”</p>
<p>On and upward moved the steps, the noise
decreasing as they passed, the sound subsiding
with them.</p>
<p>“What is it?” Verplank asked again.</p>
<p>Leilah’s under lip trembled. The deliverance
from the vortex, the after-shudder that
comes when some great peril has been barely
escaped, the sensation of strength overtaxed,
these things fusing with the consciousness that
the last barricade had been taken, that there
were now no more hostages to joy, induced
in her one of the most curious of physical
phenomena.</p>
<p>With tears running down her cheeks, she
smiled. Then, sobbing and smiling still, she
answered him:</p>
<p>“The key of the prison.”</p>
<p>Verplank nodded. He did not in the least
understand. But the singularity of her appearance,
joined to the singularity of her reply,
aroused in him a great pity for this woman<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_238">[238]</a></span>
who had ruined her life, ruined his own,
and who then seemed to him demented.</p>
<p>“Pardon, madame la comtesse. Monsieur
Palencia and Monsieur Tyszkiewicz ask if
madame la comtesse will receive them?”</p>
<p>At the door, behind her, was Emmanuel.</p>
<p>At once another phenomenon occurred.
Galvanised by that instinct of form which,
when requisite, enables women of the world
to banish instantly any trace of emotion, Leilah
turned to the footman a face in which the
tears had been reabsorbed, and from which
the smile had gone.</p>
<p>“Say to these gentlemen that I appreciate
and thank them, but that I can see no one.”</p>
<p>Emmanuel compressed his lips. He wondered
how she knew. There was a great deal
occurring in this house that perplexed him.
Moreover, Verplank’s bandage and sling interested
him very much. But, trained to his
calling, he bowed and withdrew.</p>
<p>“What do they want?” Verplank asked,
memories of his own duel surging at mention
of their names before him.</p>
<p>In Leilah’s face the tears and smiles reappearing,
mingled.</p>
<p>“Barouffski is dead,” she answered.</p>
<p>Verplank closed and opened a hand. His
mouth opened also. He was sure now that
she was crazy.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_239">[239]</a></span></p>
<p>“Dead! How? What do you mean?”</p>
<p>Leilah made a gesture.</p>
<p>“There, a moment ago, in the garden.
D’Arcy shot him.”</p>
<p>Verplank started. The definiteness of her
reply divested him of his idea concerning her,
but it produced another which was also,
though differently, disturbing. His eyes
blazed. The old scar, the scar on the right
side of his face, reddened.</p>
<p>“Who the devil is d’Arcy?”</p>
<p>For a moment he stared. Then, angrily
snapping two fingers, he cried:</p>
<p>“In taking you from this damned house to-day,
I had intended to leave a card for him, not
a p. p. c. either, one with our address on it
and the hours when I would be at home. If
there was any shooting going on, I intended
to be in it. Now some duffer must interfere.”</p>
<p>With a rapid intake of the breath, he considered
her. At the moment, he doubted it
could be true. Yet her face, with its hysterical
blending of joy and sorrow, seemed to certify
that it was so. After all, he reflected, however
the odour may occur, always the smell of an
enemy’s corpse is sweet. But, uncertain still,
he threw out for clincher:</p>
<p>“Is that what you meant by the key of the
prison?”</p>
<p>She moved to him.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_240">[240]</a></span></p>
<p>“Gulian, yes, and never can I be thankful
enough that it was not your hand that turned
it.”</p>
<p>Verplank tossed his bandaged head.</p>
<p>“So this is the end!”</p>
<p>Leilah looked up at him.</p>
<p>“Gulian, no, not that. The end of the beginning,
if you like. Hereafter we will be
beginning anew. Hereafter——”</p>
<p>She paused. The word had been evocative.
Its repetition showed her that which she had
not yet had time to consider; the decencies of
life, the decencies, too, of death, the funeral,
the widow’s weeds, the delay which the world
exacts; new hostages to joy, real though impermanent.</p>
<p>She told him of them.</p>
<p>From the church next door the organ pealed,
and as they then remade their plans—those
plans which mortals think they make, and
which always are unmade unless intended for
them—a ray of sunshine entered; the organ
pealed louder, the beauty of the melody hushed
their voices, and for a moment, to the appoggiatura
of Stradella, on that shaft of light,
Leilah’s thoughts, ascending, mounted into
realms where all things broken are made complete,
and where are found again things vanished.</p>