<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
			<p>With the unerring instinct of the man of the world, Verplank, on entering the crowded salon, divined immediately, among all the women present, the hostess whom he had never seen.</p>
			<p>As he bent over her hand, the duchess, who had not an idea how he came there, said in her fluted voice:</p>
			<p>“This is really so nice of you. I did not know you were in Paris.”</p>
			<p>“Nor did I⁠—until this moment,” answered Verplank, looking as he spoke into the eyes of his hostess who, after the one imperceptible glance with which the mondaine judges and classifies, was wondering in what manner, this man, with his virile face and impeccable presence, had forced Leilah Barouffska to leave him.</p>
			<p>“But,” he added, “Monsieur de Joyeuse whom I saw this afternoon told me that you would be at home, and assured me that I might venture to present my homages.”</p>
			<p>The duchess displayed her tireless smile. “I am only sorry not to have had them sooner.” She paused. Between her smile, the edges of her teeth showed, false but beautiful. “There is Lady Silverstairs trying to get you to look at her, and very well worth looking at she is.”</p>
			<p>Camille de Joyeuse turned for a moment to the reticent young prince who in his diffident way still lingered at her side.</p>
			<p>Beyond, at the farther end of the room, notes rippled. Standing near a grand piano, the Romanian with the flowing hair was preluding a fantasy of his own.</p>
			<p>In the hush that succeeded, Verplank moved to where Violet sat.</p>
			<p>Smilingly, without speaking, she gave him her hand and indicated a seat beside her. Then, raising a fan, she whispered:</p>
			<p>“Demon! What have you done? Where do you spring from? How long have you been in Paris?”</p>
			<p>Verplank, seating himself, answered:</p>
			<p>“I got here this morning. Why am I a demon?”</p>
			<p>From behind the fan, Violet asked:</p>
			<p>“What did you do to Leilah? Why did she leave you?”</p>
			<p>Verplank folded his gloved hands. “That is what I am here to find out.”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean to tell me that you don’t know!”</p>
			<p>“I have not an idea⁠—unless it was because of this Count Thingumagig.”</p>
			<p>Violet Silverstairs furled her fan, looked at him, looked away, looked about the room. At one end her husband, accompanied by de Joyeuse, Tempest, de Fresnoy, and the others, had entered. At the further end the Romanian dominated. Supported <i xml:lang="fr">en sourdine</i> by an accompanist, he massed sounds and dispersed them, concentrating fulgurations of notes from which echoing showers fell. Presently, resuming an abandoned measure, he caressed a largo, infinitely sweet, that swooned in the languors of the finale. At once to a murmur of bravos, the applause of gloved hands and a cry of “Bis!” raising violin and bow above his head, he bent double to the duchess, his flowing hair falling like a veil before him.</p>
			<p>“He may play again,” said Violet. “I want to talk to you. Let us go into the next room.”</p>
			<p>As Verplank rose at her bidding, others who had been seated, rose also. Interrupted conversations were more animatedly resumed. A servant announced additional names. The first salon now was thronged. The second was filled. Verplank and Violet passed on.</p>
			<p>Beyond was a gallery. At the entrance stood a woman, her face averted, talking to a man. As the others approached, she turned.</p>
			<p>At sight of her and of the man, Violet would have turned also. It was too late.</p>
			<p>“Leilah!” Verplank exclaimed.</p>
			<p>For a second, in tragic silence, two beings whom love had joined and fate had separated, stood, staring into each other’s eyes.</p>
			<p>For a second only. At once the man interposed himself between them.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur!” he insolently threw out. “My name is Barouffski.”</p>
			<p>With superior tact Lady Silverstairs intervened. “Good evening, Count. It never occurred to us that we were interrupting a tête-à-tête.”</p>
			<p>She paused. Hostilely the two men were measuring each other. In Verplank’s face there was a threat, in Barouffski’s there was a jeer, in Leilah’s there was an expression of absolute terror. Of the little group Violet alone appeared at ease.</p>
			<p>“Leilah,” she added, “don’t forget that you are to have luncheon with me tomorrow. Good night, my dear. Silverstairs and I will be going soon. Good night, Barouffski.”</p>
			<p>She smiled, nodded, took Verplank’s arm, took him away. But the arm beneath her hand was shaking and she realised that it shook with rage.</p>
			<p>Sympathetically she looked up at him. “I thought they were in the other room and it was just to avoid a thing of this sort that I got you out of it. You won’t do anything, will you?”</p>
			<p>Verplank now had got control of himself, his arm no longer shook, and it was the smile of a man of the world, the smile of one to whom nothing is important and much absurd, that he answered:</p>
			<p>“Why, yes; it was very civil of this chap to introduce himself. I shall leave a card on him. Hello! Here’s Silverstairs! I wonder if he will introduce himself, too.”</p>
			<p>The young earl was advancing, his hand outstretched. “I say! I saw a man marching off with the missis, but I had no idea it was you. Where are you stopping? Will you dine with us Tuesday?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, do.” Violet threw in. “<span xml:lang="fr">Rue François Premier</span> at eight.”</p>
			<p>“I shall be very glad to,” Verplank answered. He turned to Silverstairs. “I am at the Ritz. Stop by there tomorrow noon, won’t you, and let me take you somewhere for luncheon?”</p>
			<p>Lady Silverstairs laughed and employing a darkyism, said: “You don’t say turkey to me. There!” she exclaimed as Verplank was about to protest. “I could not anyway.”</p>
			<p>From the salon beyond came a woman’s voice, clear and rich, rendering, in a lascive contralto, a song of love and passion.</p>
			<p>The Silverstairs and Verplank approached. Meanwhile, from the diva’s mouth, notes darted like serpents on fire. In mounting fervour the aria developed, trailing, as it climbed, words such as <i xml:lang="it">amore</i>, <i xml:lang="it">speranza</i>, <i xml:lang="it">morir</i>. A breath of brutality passed. The atmosphere became charged with emanations in which the perfume of women mingled with the desires of men. Still the aria mounted, it coloured the air, projecting, like a magic lantern, visions of delight, imperial and archaic, that ascended in glittering scales.</p>
			<p>Verplank, detaching himself from the Silverstairs, felt his dumb rage renewed. At the moment he conceived an insane idea of going below, waiting without until Barouffski and Leilah appeared and he saw himself, confronting the man, tearing the woman from him, carrying her off and making her his own.</p>
			<p>The impulse fell from him. The rage that he felt at the man deflected into rage at this woman who had made his life a vacant house and for what, good God! And why?</p>
			<p>In a cascade of flowers and flames the song was ending. There was new applause, the discreet approbation of worldly people, easily pleased, as easily bored and with but one sure creed: Not too much of anything.</p>
			<p>Verplank must also have had enough. When presently the Silverstairs looked about for him he had gone.</p>
			<p>Already Violet had summarised the situation to her lord. Now, perplexed at Verplank’s abrupt disappearance, she said:</p>
			<p>“You don’t suppose that anything will happen, do you?”</p>
			<p>Silverstairs, bored by the entertainment, anxious only to get away where he could have a quiet drink, tugged at his moustache and with unconscious reminiscence answered:</p>
			<p>“I don’t know and I don’t care. I don’t care what happens as long as it doesn’t happen to me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
